Skip to main content
 
 UPLOAD
 SIGN UP | LOG IN
 
BOOKS
 
VIDEO
 
AUDIO
 
SOFTWARE
 
IMAGES
ABOUT  BLOG  PROJECTS  HELP  DONATE  CONTACT  JOBS  VOLUNTEER  PEOPLE
 Search Metadata
 Search text contents
 Search TV news captions
 Search radio transcripts
 Search archived websites
Advanced Search
Sign up for free
Log in
Full text of "JIM CORBETT OMNIBUS"
See other formats
MAN-EATERS OF KUMAOH 


THE TEMPLE TIC E R AND MORE MAN-EATERS OF KUMAON 


THE MAN-EATINC LEOPARD OF RU D RAPRAYAC 


MY INDIA 







JIM CORBETT OMNIBUS 



ROOK ONF.: 

MAN-FATERS OF KTJMAON 




Introduction 

by Sir Maurice Hallett, Governor of the United Provinces , 
1939 - 45 . 

THESE jungle stories by Jim Corbett merit as much popularity 
and as wide a circulation as Rudyard Kipling's Jungle Books. 
Kipling's Jungle Books were fiction, based on great knowledge 
of jungle life; Corbett's stories are fact, and fact is often 
stranger than fiction. These stories should prove of entrancing 
interest to all boys and girls who like exciting yarns; they 
should be of equal interest to all who take any interest in the 
wild life of the jungle; they should prove of great value to any 
genuine sportsman who wishes to earn by his own efforts the 
credit of shooting a tiger; they will be of interest even to the so- 
called sportsman who feels some pride in killing a tiger when 
all that he has done is to fire straight from a safe position on a 
machan or on the back of a staunch elephant, when all the hard 
work involved in beating up a tiger to his death has been done 
by others. 

Corbett's description of his campaign against the man-eaters of 
the Kumaon Hills shows the qualities that a successful shikari 
needs, physical strength, infinite patience, great power of 
observation and power not only to notice small signs but also to 
draw the right inference from those signs. To these must be 
added great courage. I will not make quotations from the book 
to prove this statement. Read the book for yourself; you will 
soon see the truth of it; these qualities were exhibited by 
Corbett himself, by his friends who helped him in some of these 
campaigns, by the villagers whom he went to protect, and by 
his big-hearted and faithful companion Robin. 

Jim Corbett's name is already a household word in Kumaon; I 
hope that as a result of this book it will get still wider fame. 


M. G. HALLETT 



Foreword 

by Lord LinlithgowViceroy of India, 1936-43. 

THESE stories are the true account of Major Corbett's 
experiences with man-eating tigers in the jungles of the United 
Provinces. I am most glad to commend them to all who enjoy a 
tale well told of action and adventure. 

The sportsman will find much to entertain and inform him in 
Major Corbett's book. If every beginner would study it before 
tackling his first tiger, fewer persons would be killed or 
seriously injured when hunting these creatures. For something 
more is required than courage and good marksmanship for the 
successful pursuit of dangerous game. Forethought, 
preparation, and persistence are indispensable to success. 

Over wide areas of the United Provinces the authors name is 
familiar to the village folk as that of the man who has brought 
them relief from the great fear inspired by a cruel and 
malignant presence in their midst. Many a District Officer, 
faced with the utter disorganization of rural life that attends 
the presence of a man-eating tiger or panther, has turned to 
Jim Corbett for help— never, I believe, in vain. Indeed the 
destruction of these abnormal and dangerous animals is a 
service of great value both to the afflicted population and to 
Government. 

The reader will find in these stories many proofs of the author's 
love of nature. Having spent in Major Corbett's company some 
part of such holidays as I have contrived to take during my time 
in India, I can with confidence write of him that no man with 
whom I have hunted in any continent better understands the 
signs of the jungle. Very often he has told me of the intense 
happiness he has derived from his observations of wild life. I 
make no doubt that it is in large part the recollection of all that 
his own eyes have brought him that moves him now to dedicate 
this first edition of his book to the aid of soldiers blinded in 
war, and to arrange that all profits from its sale shall be 



devoted to the funds of St Dunstan's, the famous institution in 
which men who have given their sight for their country and for 
the great cause of human freedom may learn, despite their 
affliction, to lead useful and happy lives; and whose beneficent 
ministrations are extended now to the armed forces in India. 

LINLITHGOW, 
Viceroy's House, New Delhi 



Author's Note 

As many of the stories in this book are about man-eating tigers, 
it is perhaps desirable to explain why these animals develop 
man-eating tendencies. 

A man-eating tiger is a tiger that has been compelled, through 
stress of circumstances beyond its control, to adopt a diet alien 
to it. The stress of circumstances is, in nine cases out of ten, 
wounds, and in the tenth case old age. The wound that has 
caused a particular tiger to take to man-eating might be the 
result of a carelessly fired shot and failure to follow up and 
recover the wounded animal, or be the result of the tiger 
having lost his temper when killing a porcupine. Human beings 
are not the natural prey of tigers, and it is only when tigers 
have been incapacitated through wounds or old age that, in 
order to live, they are compelled to take to a diet of human 
flesh. 

A tiger when killing its natural prey, which it does either by 
stalking or lying in wait for it, depends for the success of its 
attack on its speed and, to a lesser extent, on the condition of 
its teeth and claws. When, therefore, a tiger is suffering from 
one or more painful wounds, or when its teeth are missing or 
defective and its claw worn down, and it is unable to catch the 
animals it has been accustomed to eating, it is driven by 
necessity to killing human beings. The change-over from 
animal to human flesh is, I believe, in most cases accidental. As 
an illustration of what I mean by ' accidental 1 I quote the case 
of the Muktesar man-eating tigress. This tigress, a 
comparatively young animal, in an encounter with a porcupine 
lost an eye and got some fifty quills, varying in length from one 
to nine inches, embedded in the arm and under the pad of her 
right foreleg. Several of these quills after striking a bone had 
doubled back in the form of a U, the point, and the broken-off 
end, being quite close together. Suppurating sores formed 
where she endeavoured to extract the quills with her teeth, and 
while she was lying up in a thick patch of grass, starving and 



licking her wounds, a woman selected this particular patch of 
grass to cut as fodder for her cattle. At first the tigress took no 
notice, but when the woman had cut the grass right up to 
where she was lying the tigress struck once, the blow crushing 
in the woman's skull. Death was instantaneous, for, when found 
the following day, she was grasping her sickle with one hand 
and holding a tuft of grass, which she was about to cut when 
struck, with the other. Leaving the woman lying where she had 
fallen, the tigress limped off for a distance of over a mile and 
took refuge in a little hollow under a fallen tree. Two days later 
a man came to chip firewood off this fallen tree, and the tigress 
who was lying on the far side killed him. The man fell across 
the tree, and as he had removed his coat and shirt and the 
tigress had clawed his back when killing him, it is possible that 
the smell of the blood trickling down his body as he hung 
across the bole of the tree first gave her the idea that he was 
something that she could satisfy her hunger with. However that 
may be, before leaving him she ate a small portion from his 
back. A day after she killed her third victim deliberately, and 
without having received any provocation. Thereafter she 
became an established man-eater and had killed twenty-four 
people before she was finally accounted for. 

A tiger on a fresh kill, or a wounded tiger, or a tigress with 
small cubs, will occasionally kill human beings who disturb 
them; but these tigers cannot, by any stretch of imagination, be 
called man-eaters, though they are often so called. Personally I 
would give a tiger the benefit of the doubt once, and once 
again, before classing it as a man-eater, and whenever possible 
I would subject the alleged victim to a post-mortem before 
letting the kill go down on the records as the kill of a tiger or a 
leopard, as the case might be. This subject of post-mortems of 
human beings alleged to have been killed by either tigers or 
leopards or, in the plains, by wolves or hyenas, is of great 
importance, for, though I refrain from giving instances, I know 
of cases where deaths have wrongly been ascribed to 
carnivora. 



It is a popular fallacy that all man-eaters are old and mangy 
the mange being attributed to the excess of salt in human flesh. 
I am not competent to give any opinion on the relative quantity 
of salt in human or animal flesh; but I can, and I do, assert that 
a diet of human flesh, so far from having an injurious effect on 
the coat of man-eaters, has quite the opposite effect, for all the 
man-eaters I have seen have had remarkably fine coats. 

Another popular belief in connexion with man-eaters is that the 
cubs of these animals automatically become man-eaters. This is 
quite a reasonable supposition; but it is not borne out by actual 
facts, and the reason why the cubs of a man-eater do not 
themselves become man-eaters, is that human beings are not 
the natural prey of tigers, or of leopards. 

A cub will eat whatever its mother provides, and I have even 
known of tiger cubs assisting their mothers to kill human 
beings: but I do not know of a single instance of a cub, after it 
had left the protection of its parent, or after that parent had 
been killed, taking to killing human beings. 

In the case of human beings killed by carnivora, the doubt is 
often expressed' as to whether the animal responsible for the 
kill is a tiger or leopard. As a general rule— to which I have 
seen no exceptions— tigers are responsible for all kills that 
take place in daylight, and leopards are responsible for all kills 
that take place in the dark. Both animals are semi-nocturnal 
forest-dwellers, have much the same habits, employ similar 
methods of killing, and both are capable of carrying their 
human victims for long distances. It would be natural, 
therefore, to expect them to hunt at the same hours; and that 
they do not do so is due to the difference in courage of the two 
animals. When a tiger becomes a man-eater it loses all fear of 
human beings and, as human beings move about more freely in 
the day than they do at night, it is able to secure its victims 
during daylight hours and there is no necessity for it to visit 
their habitations at night. A leopard on the other hand, even 
after it has killed scores of human beings, never loses its fear 



of man; and, as it is unwilling to face up to human beings in 
daylight, it secures its victims when they are moving about at 
night, or by breaking into their houses at night. Owing to these 
characteristics of the two animals, namely, that one loses its 
fear of human beings and kills in the daylight, while the other 
retains its fear and kills in the dark, man-eating tigers are 
easier to shoot than man-eating leopards. 

The frequency with which a man-eating tiger kills depends on 
(a) the supply of natural food in the area in which it is 
operating; (b) the nature of the disability which has caused it to 
become a man-eater, and (c) whether it is a male or a female 
with cubs. 

Those of us who lack the opportunity of forming our own 
opinion on any particular subject are apt to accept the opinions 
of others, and in no case is this more apparent than in the case 
of tigers— here I do not refer to man-eaters in particular, but to 
tigers in general. The author who first used the words 1 as cruel 
as a tiger 1 and 'as bloodthirsty as a tiger 1 , when attempting to 
emphasize the evil character of the villain of his piece, not only 
showed a lamentable ignorance of the animal he defamed, but 
coined phrases which have come into universal circulation, and 
which are mainly responsible for the wrong opinion of tigers 
held by all except that very small proportion of the public who 
have the opportunity of forming their own opinions. 

When I see the expression 'as cruel as a tiger' and 1 as 
bloodthirsty as a tiger' in print, I think of a small boy armed 
with an old muzzle— loading gun— the right barrel of which 
was split for six inches of its length, and the stock and barrels 
of which were kept from falling apart by lashings of brass wire 
— wandering through the jungles of the terai and bhabar in the 
days when there were ten tigers to every one that now 
survives; sleeping anywhere he happened to be when night 
came on, with a small fire to give him company and warmth, 
wakened at intervals by the calling of tigers, sometimes in the 
distance, at other times near at hand; throwing another stick 



on the fire and turning over and continuing his interrupted 
sleep without one thought of unease; knowing from his own 
short experience and from what others, who like himself had 
spent their days in the jungles, had told him, that a tiger, unless 
molested, would do him no harm; or during daylight hours 
avoiding any tiger he saw, and when that was not possible, 
standing perfectly still until it had passed and gone, before 
continuing on his way And I think of him on one occasion 
stalking half-a-dozen jungle fowl that were feeding in the open, 
and on creeping up to a plum bush and standing up to peer 
over, the bush heaving and a tiger walking out on the far side 
and, on clearing the bush, turning round and looking at the boy 
with an expression on its face which said as clearly as any 
words, 'Hello, kid, what the hell are you doing here ? 1 and, 
receiving no answer, turning round and waiting away very 
slowly without once looking back.. And then again I think of the 
tens of thousands of men, women and children who, while 
working in the forests or cutting grass or collecting dry sticks, 
pass day after day close to where tigers are lying up and who, 
when they return safely to their homes, do not even know that 
they have been under the observation of this so called 'cruel' 
and 1 bloodthirsty 1 animal. 

Half a century has rolled by since the day the tiger walked out 
of the plum bush, the latter thirty-two years of which have been 
spent in the more or less regular pursuit of man-eaters, and 
though sights have been seen which would have caused a stone 
to weep, I have not seen a case where a tiger has been 
deliberately cruel or where it has been bloodthirsty to the 
extent that it has killed, without provocation, more than it has 
needed to satisfy its hunger or the hunger of its cubs. 

A tiger's function in the scheme of things is to help maintain 
the balance in nature and if, on rare occasions when driven by 
dire necessity, he kills a human being or when his natural food 
has been ruthlessly exterminated by man he kills two per cent 
of the cattle he is alleged to have killed, it is not fair that for 
these acts a whole species should be branded as being cruel 



and bloodthirsty. 

Sportsmen are admittedly conservative, the reason being that 
it has taken them years to form their opinions, and as each 
individual has a different point of view, it is only natural that 
opinions should differ on minor, or even in some cases on 
major, points, and for this reason I do not flatter myself that all 
the opinions I have expressed will meet with universal 
agreement. 

There is, however, one point on which I am convinced that all 
sportsmen— no matter whether their viewpoint has been a 
platform on a tree, the back of an elephant or their own feet— 
will agree with me, and that is, that a tiger is a large-hearted 
gentleman with boundless courage and that when he is 
exterminated— as exterminated he will be unless public 
opinion rallies to his support— India will be the poorer by 
having lost the finest of her fauna. 

Leopards, unlike tigers, are to a certain extent scavengers and 
become man-eaters by acquiring a taste for human flesh when 
unrestricted slaughter of game has deprived them of their 
natural food. 

The dwellers in our hills are predominantly Hindu, and as such 
cremate their dead. The cremation invariably takes place on 
the bank of a stream or river in order that the ashes may be 
washed down into the Ganges and eventually into the sea. As 
most of the villages are situated high up on the hills, while the 
streams or rivers are in many cases miles away down in the 
valleys, it will be realized that a funeral entails a considerable 
tax on the man-power of a small community when, in addition 
to the carrying party, labour has to be provided to collect and 
carry the fuel needed for the cremation. In normal times these 
rites are carried out very effectively; but when disease in 
epidemic form sweeps through the hills and the inhabitants die 
faster than they can be disposed of, a very simple rite, which 
consists of placing a live coal in the mouth of the deceased, is 
performed in the village and the body is then carried to the 



edge of the hill and cast into the valley below. 

A leopard, in an area in which his natural food is scarce, 
finding these bodies very soon acquires a taste for human flesh, 
and when the disease dies down and normal conditions are 
established, he very naturally, on finding his food supply cut off, 
takes to killing human beings. 

Of the two man-eating leopards of Kumaon, which between 
them killed five hundred and twenty-five human beings, one 
followed on the heels of a very severe outbreak of cholera, 
while the other followed the mysterious disease which swept 
through India in 1918 and was called 'war fever'. 



The Champawat Man-Eater 

I 

I WAS shooting with Eddie Knowles in Malani when I first 
heard of the tiger which later received official recognition as 
the 1 Champawat man-eater 

Eddie, who will long be remembered in this province as a 
sportsman par excellence and the possessor of an inexhaustible 
fund of shikar yarns, was one of those few, and very fortunate, 
individuals who possess the best of everything in life. His rifle 
was without equal in accuracy and striking power, and while 
one of his brothers was the best gun shot in India, another 
brother was the best tennis player in the Indian Army When 
therefore Eddie informed me that his brother-in-law, the best 
shikari in the world, had been deputed by Government to shoot 
the Champawat man-eater, it was safe to assume that a very 
definite period had been put to the animal's activities. 

The tiger, however, for some inexplicable reason, did not die, 
and was causing Government a great deal of anxiety when I 
visited Naini Tal four years later. Rewards were offered, special 
shikaris employed, and parties of Gurkhas sent out from the 
depot in Almora. Yet in spite of these measures, the toll of 
human victims continued to mount alarmingly. 

The tigress, for such the animal turned out to be, had arrived in 
Kumaon as a full-fledged man-eater, from Nepal, from whence 
she had been driven out by a body of armed Nepalese after she 
had killed two hundred human beings, and during the four 
years she had been operating in Kumaon had added two 
hundred and thirty-four to this number. 

This is how matters stood, when shortly after my arrival in 
Naini Tal I received a visit from Berthoud. Berthoud, who was 
Deputy Commissioner of Naini Tal at that time, and who after 
his tragic death now lies buried in an obscure grave in 
Haldwani, was a man who was loved and respected by all who 
knew him, and it is not surprising therefore that when he told 



me of the trouble the man-eater was giving the people of his 
district, and the anxiety it was causing him, he took my 
promise with him that I would start for Champawat 
immediately on receipt of news of the next human kill. 

Two conditions I made, however: one that the Government 
rewards be cancelled, and the other, that the special shikaris, 
and regulars from Almora, be withdrawn. My reasons for 
making these conditions need no explanation for I am sure all 
sportsmen share my aversion to being classed as a reward- 
hunter and are as anxious as I am to avoid the risk of being 
accidentally shot. These conditions were agreed to, and a week 
later Berthoud paid me an early morning visit and informed me 
that news had been brought in during the night by runners that 
a woman had been killed by the man-eater at Pali, a village 
between Dabidhura and Dhunaghat. 

In anticipation of a start at short notice, I had engaged six men 
to carry my camp kit, and leaving after breakfast, we did a 
march the first day of seventeen miles to Dhari. Breakfasting at 
Mornaula next morning, we spent the night at Dabidhura, and 
arrived at Pali the following evening, five days after the woman 
had been killed. 

The people of the village, numbering some fifty men, women 
and children, were in a state of abject terror, and though the 
sun was still up when I arrived I found the entire population 
inside their homes behind locked doors, and it was not until my 
men had made a fire in the courtyard and I was sitting down to 
a cup of tea that a door here and there was cautiously opened, 
and the frightened inmates emerged. 

I was informed that for five days no one had gone beyond their 
own doorsteps— the insanitary condition of the courtyard 
testified to the truth of this statement— that food was running 
short, and that the people would starve if the tiger was not 
killed or driven away. 

That the tiger was still in the vicinity was apparent. For three 



nights it had been heard calling on the road, distant a hundred 
yards from the houses, and that very day it had been seen on 
the cultivated land at the lower end of the village. 

The Headman of the village very willingly placed a room at my 
disposal, but as there were eight of us to share it, and the only 
door it possessed opened on to the insanitary courtyard, I 
elected to spend the night in the open. 

After a scratch meal which had to do duty for dinner, I saw my 
men safely shut into the room and myself took up a position on 
the side of the road, with my back to a tree. The villagers said 
the tiger was in the habit of perambulating along this road, and 
as the moon was at the full I thought there was a chance of my 
getting a shot— provided I saw it first. 

I had spent many nights in the jungle looking for game, but this 
was the first time I had ever spent a night looking for a man- 
eater. The length of road immediately in front of me was 
brilliantly lit by the moon, but to right and left the overhanging 
trees cast dark shadows, and when the night wind agitated the 
branches and the shadows moved, I saw a dozen tigers 
advancing on me, and bitterly regretted the impulse that had 
induced me to place myself at the man-eater's mercy. I lacked 
the courage to return to the village and admit I was too 
frightened to carry out my self-imposed task, and with teeth 
chattering, as much from fear as from cold, I sat out the long 
night. As the grey dawn was lighting up the snowy range which 
I was facing, I rested my head on my drawn-up knees, and it 
was in this position my men an hour later found me— fast 
asleep; of the tiger I had neither heard nor seen anything. 

Back in the village I tried to get the men— who I could see 
were very surprised I had survived the night— to take me to 
the places where the people of the village had from time to 
time been killed, but this they were unwilling to do. From the 
courtyard they pointed out the direction in which the kills had 
taken place; the last kill— the one that had brought me to the 
spot— I was told, had taken place round the shoulder of the hill 



to the west of the village. The women and girls, some twenty in 
number, who had been out collecting oak leaves for the cattle 
when the unfortunate woman had been killed, were eager to 
give me details of the occurrence. It appeared that the party 
had set out two hours before midday and, after going half a 
mile, had climbed into trees to cut leaves. The victim and two 
other women had selected a tree growing on the edge of a 
ravine, which I subsequently found was about four feet deep 
and ten to twelve feet wide. Having cut all the leaves she 
needed, the woman was climbing down from the tree when the 
tiger, who had approached unseen, stood up on its hind legs 
and caught her by the foot. Her hold was torn from the branch 
she was letting herself down by, and, pulling her into the 
ravine, the tiger released her foot, and while she was 
struggling to rise caught her by the throat. After killing her it 
sprang up the side of the ravine and disappeared with her into 
some heavy undergrowth. 

All this had taken place a few feet from the two women on the 
tree, and had been witnessed by the entire party. As soon as 
the tiger and its victim were out of sight, the terror-stricken 
women and girls ran back to the village. The men had just 
come in for their midday meal and, when all were assembled 
and armed with drums, metal cooking-pots— anything in fact 
that would produce a noise— the rescue party set off, the men 
leading and the women bringing up the rear. 

Arrived at the ravine in which the woman had been killed, the 
very important question of 1 what next?' was being debated 
when the tiger interrupted the proceedings by emitting a loud 
roar from the bushes thirty yards away. As one man the party 
turned and fled helter-skelter back to the village. When breath 
had been regained, accusations were made against one and 
another of having been the first to run and cause the stampede. 

Words ran high until it was suggested that if no one was afraid 
and all were as brave as they claimed to be, why not go back 
and rescue the woman without loss of more time? The 



suggestion was adopted, and three times the party got as far as 
the ravine. On the third occasion the one man who was armed 
with a gun fired it off, and brought the tiger roaring out of the 
bushes; after this the attempted rescue was very wisely 
abandoned. On my asking the gun man why he had not 
discharged his piece into the bushes instead of up into the air, 
he said the tiger was already greatly enraged and that if by any 
mischance he had hit it, it would undoubtedly have killed him. 

For three hours that morning I walked round the village 
looking for tracks and hoping, and at the same time dreading, 
to meet the tiger. At one place in a dark heavily-wooded ravine, 
while I was skirting some bushes, a covey of kaleege pheasants 
fluttered screaming out of them, and I thought my heart had 
stopped beating for good. 

My men had cleared a spot under a walnut tree for my meals, 
and after breakfast the Headman of the village asked me to 
mount guard while the wheat crop was being cut. He said that 
if the crop was not harvested in my presence, it would not be 
harvested at all, for the people were too frightened to leave 
their homes. Half an hour later the entire population of the 
village, assisted by my men, were hard at work while I stood on 
guard with a loaded rifle. By evening the crop from five large 
fields had been gathered, leaving only two small patches close 
to the houses, which the Headman said he would have no 
difficulty in dealing with the next day. 

The sanitary condition of the village had been much improved, 
and a second room for my exclusive use placed at my disposal; 
and that night, with thorn bushes securely wedged in the 
doorway to admit ventilation and exclude the man-eater, I made 
up for the sleep I had lost the previous night. 

My presence was beginning to put new heart into the people 
and they were moving about more freely, but I had not yet 
gained sufficient of their confidence to renew my request of 
being shown round the jungle, to which I attached some 
importance. These people knew every foot of the ground for 



miles round, and could, if they wished, show me where I was 
most likely to find the tiger, or in any case, where I could see 
its pug marks. That the man-eater was a tiger was an 
established fact, but it was not known whether the animal was 
young or old, a male or a female, and this information, which I 
believed would help me to get in touch with it, I could only 
ascertain by examining its pug marks. 

After an early tea that morning I announced that I wanted meat 
for my men and asked the villagers if they could direct me to 
where I could shoot a ghooral (mountain goat). The village was 
situated on the top of a long ridge running east and west, and 
just below the road on which I had spent the night the hill fell 
steeply away to the north in a series of grassy slopes; on these 
slopes I was told ghooral were plentiful, and several men 
volunteered to show me over the ground. I was careful not to 
show my pleasure at this offer and, selecting three men, I set 
out, telling the Headman that if I found the ghooral as plentiful 
as he said they were, I would shoot two for the village in 
addition to shooting one for my men. 

Crossing the road we went down a very steep ridge, keeping a 
sharp lookout to right and left, but saw nothing. Half a mile 
down the hill the ravines converged, and from their junction 
there was a good view of the rocky, and grass-covered, slope to 
the right. I had been sitting for some minutes, scanning the 
slope, with my back to a solitary pine which grew at this spot, 
when a movement high up on the hill caught my eye. When the 
movement was repeated I saw it was a ghooral flapping its 
ears; the animal was standing in grass and only its head was 
visible. The men had not seen the movement, and as the head 
was now stationary and blended in with its surroundings it was 
not possible to point it out to them. Giving them a general idea 
of the animal's position I made them sit down and watch while I 
took a shot. I was armed with an old Martini Henry rifle, a 
weapon that atoned for its vicious kick by being dead accurate 
— up to any range. The distance was as near 200 yards as 
made no matter and, lying down and resting the rifle on a 



convenient pine root, I took careful aim, and fired. 

The smoke from the black powder cartridge obscured my view 
and the men said nothing had happened and that I had 
probably fired at a rock, or a bunch of dead leaves. Retaining 
my position I reloaded the rifle and presently saw the grass, a 
little below where I had fired, moving, and the hind quarters of 
the ghooral appeared. When the whole animal was free of the 
grass it started to roll over and over, gaming momentum as it 
came down the steep hill. When' it was half-way down it 
disappeared into heavy grass, and disturbed two ghooral that 
had been lying up there. Sneezing their alarm call, the two 
animals dashed out of the grass and went bounding up the hill. 
The range was shorter now, and, adjusting the leaf sight, I 
waited until the bigger of the two slowed down and put a bullet 
through its back, and as the other one turned, and made off 
diagonally across the hill, I shot it through the shoulder. 

On occasions one is privileged to accomplish the seemingly 
impossible. Lying in an uncomfortable position and shooting up 
at an angle of sixty degrees at a range of 200 yards at the small 
white mark on the ghooral's throat, there did not appear to be 
one chance in a million of the shot coming off, and yet the 
heavy lead bullet driven by black powder had not been 
deflected by a hair's breadth and had gone true to its mark, 
killing the animal instantaneously. Again, on the steep hillside 
which was broken up by small ravines and jutting rocks, the 
dead animal had slipped and rolled straight to the spot where 
its two companions were lying up; and before it had cleared the 
patch of grass the two companions in their turn were slipping 
rolling down the hill. As the three dead animals landed in the 
ravine in front of us it was amusing to observe the surprise and 
delight of the men who never before had seen a rifle in action. 
All thought of the man-eater was for the time being forgotten 
as they scrambled down into the ravine to retrieve the bag. 

The expedition was a great success in more ways than one; for 
in addition to providing a ration of meat for everyone, it gained 



me the confidence of the entire village. Shikar yarns, as 
everyone knows, never lose anything in repetition, and while 
the ghooral were being skinned and divided up the three men 
who had accompanied me gave full rein to their imagination, 
and from where I sat in the open, having breakfast, I could 
hear the exclamations of the assembled crowd when they were 
told that the ghooral had been shot at a range of over a mile, 
and that the magic bullets used had not only killed the animals 
— like that— but had also drawn them to the sahib's feet. 

After the midday meal the Headman asked me where I wanted 
to go, and how many men I wished to take with me. From the 
eager throng of men who pressed round I selected two of my 
late companions, and with them to guide me set off to visit the 
scene of the last human tragedy. 

The people of our hills are Hindus and cremate their dead, and 
when one of their number has been carried off by a man-eater 
it is incumbent on the relatives to recover some portion of the 
body for cremation even if it be only a few splinters of bone. In 
the case of this woman the cremation ceremony was yet to be 
performed, and as we started out, the relatives requested us to 
bring back any portion of the body we might find. 

From early boyhood I have made a hobby of reading, and 
interpreting, jungle signs. In the present case I had the account 
of the eye-witnesses who were present when the woman was 
killed, but eye-witnesses are not always reliable, whereas 
jungle signs are a true record of all that has transpired. On 
arrival at the spot a glance at the ground showed me that the 
tiger could only have approached the tree one way, without 
being seen, and that was up the ravine. Entering the ravine a 
hundred yards below the tree, and working up, I found the pug 
marks of a tiger in some fine earth that had sifted down 
between two big rocks; these pug marks showed the animal to 
be a tigress, a little past her prime. Further up the ravine, and 
some ten yards from the tree, the tigress had lain down behind 
a rock, presumably to wait for the woman to climb down from 



the tree. The victim had been the first to cut all the leaves she 
needed, and as she was letting herself down by a branch some 
two inches in diameter the tigress had crept forward and, 
standing up on her hind legs, had caught the woman by the 
foot and pulled her down into the ravine. The branch showed 
the desperation with which the unfortunate woman had clung 
to it, for adhering to the rough oak bark where the branch, and 
eventually the leaves, had slipped through her grasp were 
strands of skin which had been torn from the palms of her 
hands and fingers. Where the tigress had killed the woman 
there were signs of a struggle and a big patch of dried blood; 
from here the blood trail, now dry but distinctly visible, led 
across the ravine and up the opposite bank. Following the 
blood trail from where it left the ravine we found the place in 
the bushes where the tigress had eaten her kill. 

It is a popular belief that man-eaters do not eat the head, 
hands, and feet of the human victims. This is incorrect. Man- 
eaters, if not disturbed, eat everything— including the blood- 
soaked clothes, as I found on one occasion; however, that is 
another story, and will be told some other time. 

On the present occasion we found the woman's clothes, and a 
few pieces of bone which we wrapped up in the clean cloth we 
had brought for the purpose. Pitifully little as these remains 
were, they would suffice for the cremation ceremony which 
would ensure the ashes of the high caste woman reaching 
Mother Ganges. 

After tea I visited the scene of yet another tragedy. Separated 
from the main village by the public road was a small holding of 
a few acres. The owner of this holding had built himself a hut 
on the hillside just above the road. The man's wife, and the 
mother of his two children, a boy and a girl aged four and six 
respectively, was the younger of two sisters. These two sisters 
were out cutting grass one day on the hill above the hut when 
the tigress suddenly appeared and carried off the elder sister. 
For a hundred yards the younger woman ran after the tigress 



brandishing her sickle and screaming at the tigress to let her 
sister go, and take her instead. This incredible act of heroism 
was witnessed by the people in the main village. After carrying 
the dead woman for a hundred yards the tigress put her down 
and turned on her pursuer. With a loud roar it sprang at the 
brave woman who, turning, raced down the hillside, across the 
road, and into the village, evidently with the intention of telling 
the people what they, unknown to her, had already witnessed. 
The woman's incoherent noises were at the time attributed to 
loss of breath, fear, and excitement, and it was not until the 
rescue party that had set out with all speed had returned, 
unsuccessful, that it was found the woman had lost her power 
of speech. I was told this tale in the village, and when I climbed 
the path to the two-roomed hut where the woman was engaged 
in washing clothes, she had then been dumb a twelvemonth. 

Except for a strained look in her eyes the dumb woman 
appeared to be guite normal and, when I stopped to speak to 
her and tell her I had come to try and shoot the tiger that had 
killed her sister, she put her hands together and stooping down 
touched my feet, making me feel a wretched impostor. True, I 
had come with the avowed object of shooting the man-eater, 
but with an animal that had the reputation of never killing 
twice in the same locality, never returning to a kill, and whose 
domain extended over an area of many hundred square miles, 
the chance of my accomplishing my object was about as good 
as finding a needle in two haystacks. 

Plans in plenty I had made way back in Naini Tal; one I had 
already tried and wild horses would not induce me to try it 
again, and the others— now that I was on the ground— were 
just as unattractive. Further there was no one I could ask for 
advice, for this was the first man-eater that had ever been 
known in Kumaon; and yet something would have to be done. 

So for the next three days I wandered through the jungles from 
sunrise to sunset, visiting all the places for miles round where 
the villagers told me there was a chance of my seeing the 
tigress. 



I would like to interrupt my tale here for a few minutes to 
refute a rumour current throughout the hills that on this, and 
on several subsequent occasions, I assumed the dress of a hill 
woman and, going into the jungle, attracted the man-eaters to 
myself and killed them with either a sickle or an axe. All I have 
ever done in the matter of alteration of dress has been to 
borrow a sari and with it draped round me cut grass, or, 
climbed into trees and cut leaves, and in no case has the ruse 
proved successful; though on two occasions— to my knowledge 
— man-eaters have stalked the tree I was on, taking cover, on 
one occasion behind a rock and on the other behind a fallen 
tree, and giving me no opportunity of shooting them. 

To continue. As the tigress now appeared to have left this 
locality I decided, much to the regret of the people of Pali, to 
move to Champawat fifteen miles due east of Pali. Making an 
early start, I breakfasted at Dhunaghat, and completed the 
journey to Champawat by sunset. The roads in this area were 
considered very unsafe, and men only moved from village to 
village or to the bazaars in large parties. After leaving 
Dhunaghat, my party of eight was added to by men from 
villages adjoining the road, and we arrived at Champawat 
thirty strong. Some of the men who joined me had been in a 
party of twenty men who had visited Champawat two months 
earlier, and they told me the following very pitiful story. 

'The road for a few miles on this side of Champawat runs along 
the south face of the hill, parallel to, and about fifty yards 
above the valley. Two months ago a party of twenty of us men 
were on our way to the bazaar at Champawat, and as we were 
going along this length of the road at about midday, we were 
startled by hearing the agonized cries of a human being coming 
from the valley below. Huddled together on the edge of the 
road we cowered in fright as these cries drew nearer and 
nearer, and presently into view came a tiger, carrying a naked 
woman. The woman's hair was trailing on the ground on one 
side of the tiger, and her feet on the other— the tiger was 
holding her by the small of the back— and she was beating her 



chest and calling alternately on God and man to help her. Fifty 
yards from, and in clear view of us, the tiger passed with its 
burden, and when the cries had died away in the distance we 
continued on our way. 1 

'And you twenty men did nothing? 1 

'No, sahib, we did nothing for we were afraid, and what can 
men do when they are afraid? And further, even if we had been 
able to rescue the woman without angering the tiger and 
bringing misfortune on ourselves, it would have availed the 
woman nothing, for she was covered with blood and would of a 
surety have died of her wounds/ 

I subsequently learned that the victim belonged to a village 
near Champawat, and that she had been carried off by the tiger 
while collecting dry sticks. Her companions had run back to the 
village and raised an alarm, and just as a rescue party was 
starting the twenty frightened men arrived. As these men knew 
the direction in which the tiger had gone with its victim, they 
joined the party, and can best carry on the story. 

'We were fifty or sixty strong when we set out to rescue the 
woman, and several of the party were armed with guns. A 
furlong from where the sticks collected by the woman were 
lying, and from where she had been carried off, we found her 
torn clothes. Thereafter the men started beating their drums 
and firing off their guns, and in this way we proceeded for 
more than a mile right up to the head of the valley, where we 
found the woman, who was little more than a girl, lying dead on 
a great slab of rock. Beyond licking off all the blood and 
making her body clean the tiger had not touched her, and, 
there being no woman in our party, we men averted our faces 
as we wrapped her body in the loincloths which one and 
another gave, for she looked as she lay on her back as one who 
sleeps, and would waken in shame when touched/ 

With experiences such as these to tell and retell through the 
long night watches behind fast-shut doors, it is little wonder 



that the character and outlook on life of people living year after 
year in a man-eater country should change, and that one 
coming from the outside should feel that he had stepped right 
into a world of stark realities and the rule of the tooth and claw, 
which forced man in the reign of the sabre-toothed tiger to 
shelter in dark caverns. I was young and inexperienced in those 
far-off Champawat days, but, even so, the conviction I came to 
after a brief sojourn in that stricken land, that there is no more 
terrible thing than to live and have one's being under the 
shadow of a man-eater, has been strengthened by thirty-two 
years' subsequent experience. 

The Tahsildar of Champawat, to whom I had been given letters 
of introduction, paid me a visit that night at the Dak Bungalow 
where I was putting up, and suggested I should move next day 
to a bungalow a few miles away, in the vicinity of which many 
human beings had been killed. 

Early next morning, accompanied by the Tahsildar, I set out for 
the bungalow, and while I was having breakfast on the 
verandah two men arrived with news that a cow had been 
killed by a tiger in a village ten miles away. The Tahsildar 
excused himself to attend to some urgent work at Champawat, 
and said he would return to the bungalow in the evening and 
stay the night with me. My guides were good walkers, and as 
the track went downhill most of the way we covered the ten 
miles in record time. Arrived at the village I was taken to a 
cattle-shed in which I found a week-old calf, killed and partly 
eaten by a leopard. Not having the time or the inclination to 
shoot the leopard I rewarded my guides, and retraced my steps 
to the bungalow. Here I found the Tahsildar had not returned, 
and as there was still an hour or more of daylight left I went 
out with the chowkidar of the bungalow to look at a place 
where he informed me a tiger was in the habit of drinking; this 
place I found to be the head of the spring which supplied the 
garden with irrigation water. In the soft earth round the spring 
were tiger pug marks several days old, but these tracks were 
quite different from the pug marks I had seen, and carefully 



examined, in the ravine in which the woman of Pali village had 
been killed. 

On returning to the bungalow I found the Tahsildar was back, 
and as we sat on the verandah I told him of my day's 
experience. Expressing regret at my having had to go so far on 
a wild-goose chase, he rose, saying that as he had a long way to 
go he must start at once. This announcement caused me no 
little surprise, for twice that day he had said he would stay the 
night with me. It was not the question of his staying the night 
that concerned me, but the risk he was taking; however, he was 
deaf to all my arguments and, as he stepped off the verandah 
into the dark night, with only one man following him carrying a 
smoky lantern which gave a mere glimmer of light, to do a walk 
of four miles in a locality in which men only moved in large 
parties in daylight, I took off my hat to a very brave man. 
Having watched him out of sight I turned and entered the 
bungalow. 

I have a tale to tell of that bungalow but I will not tell it here, 
for this is a book of jungle stories, and tales 'beyond the laws of 
nature ' do not consort well with such stories. 

II 

I spent the following morning in going round the very extensive 
fruit orchard and tea garden and in having a bath at the spring, 
and at about midday the Tahsildar, much to my relief, returned 
safely from Champawat. 

I was standing talking to him while looking down a long sloping 
hill with a village surrounded by cultivated land in the distance, 
when I saw a man leave the village and start up the hill in our 
direction. As the man drew nearer I saw he was alternately 
running and walking, and was quite evidently the bearer of 
important news. Telling the Tahsildar I would return in a few 
minutes, I set off at a run 'down the hill, and when the man saw 
me coming he sat down to take breath. As soon as I was near 
enough to hear him he called out, ' Come quickly, sahib, the 
man-eater has just killed a girl/ 'Sit still/ I called back, and 


turning ran up to the bungalow. I passed the news on to the 
Tahsildar while I was getting a rifle and some cartridges, and 
asked him to follow me down to the village. 

The man who had come for me was one of those exasperating 
individuals whose legs and tongue cannot function at the same 
time. When he opened his mouth he stopped dead, and when 
he started to run his mouth closed; so telling him to shut his 
mouth and lead the way, we ran in silence down the hill. 

At the village an excited crowd of men, women and children 
awaited us and, as usually happens on these occasions, all 
started to talk at the same time. One man was vainly trying to 
quieten the babel. I led him aside and asked him to tell me 
what had happened. Pointing to some scattered oak trees on a 
gentle slope a furlong or so from the village, he said a dozen 
people were collecting dry sticks under the trees when a tiger 
suddenly appeared and caught one of their number, a girl 
sixteen or seventeen years of age. The rest of the party had run 
back to the village, and as it was known that I was staying at 
the bungalow a man had immediately been dispatched to 
inform me. 

The wife of the man I was speaking to had been of the party, 
and she now pointed out the tree, on the shoulder of the hill, 
under which the girl had been taken. None of the party had 
looked back to see if the tiger was carrying away its victim and, 
if so, in which direction it had gone. 

Instructing the crowd not to make a noise, and to remain in the 
village until I returned, I set off in the direction of the tree. The 
ground here was quite open and it was difficult to conceive 
how an animal the size of a tiger could have approached twelve 
people unseen, and its presence not detected, until attention 
had been attracted by the choking sound made by the girl. 

The spot where the girl had been killed was marked by a pool 
of blood and near it, and in vivid contrast to the crimson pool, 
was a broken necklace of brightly coloured blue beads which 



the girl had been wearing. From this spot the track led up and 
round the shoulder of the hill. 


The track of the tigress was clearly visible. On one side of it 
were great splashes of blood where the girl's head had hung 
down, and on the other side the trail of her feet. Half a mile up 
the hill I found the girl's sari, and on the brow of the hill her 
skirt. Once again the tigress was carrying a naked woman, but 
mercifully on this occasion her burden was dead. 

On the brow of the hill the track led through a thicket of 
blackthorn, on the thorns of which long strands of the girl's 
raven-black hair had caught. Beyond this was a bed of nettles 
through which the tigress had gone, and I was looking for a 
way round this obstruction when I heard footsteps behind me. 
Turning round I saw a man armed with a rifle coming towards 
me. I asked him why he had followed me when I had left 
instructions at the village that no one was to leave it. He said 
the Tahsildar had instructed him to accompany me, and that he 
was afraid to disobey orders. As he appeared determined to 
carry out his orders, and to argue the point would have meant 
the loss of valuable time, I told him to remove the heavy pair of 
boots he was wearing and, when he had hidden them under a 
bush, I advised him to keep close to me, and to keep a sharp 
lookout behind. 

I was wearing a very thin pair of stockings, shorts, and a pair of 
rubber-soled shoes, and as there appeared to be no way round 
the nettles I followed the tigress through them— much to my 
discomfort. 

Beyond the nettles the blood trail turned sharply to the left, 
and went straight down the very steep hill, which was densely 
clothed with bracken and ringals (Hill bamboos). A hundred 
yards down, the blood trail led into a narrow and very steep 
watercourse, down which the tigress had gone with some 
difficulty, as could be seen from the dislodged stones and earth. 
I followed this watercourse for five or six hundred yards, my 
companion getting more and more agitated the further we 



went. A dozen times he caught my arm and whispered— in a 
voice full of tears— that he could hear the tiger, either on one 
side or the other, or behind us. Half-way down the hill we came 
on a great pinnacle of rock some thirty feet high, and as the 
man had by now had all the man-eater hunting he could stand, 

I told him to climb the rock and remain on it until I returned. 
Very gladly he went up, and when he straddled the top and 
signalled to me that he was all right I continued on down the 
watercourse, which, after skirting round the rock, went 
straight down for a hundred yards to where it met a deep 
ravine coming down from the left. At the junction was a small 
pool, and as I approached it I saw patches of blood on my side 
of the water. 

The tigress had carried the girl straight down on this spot, and 
my approach had disturbed her at her meal. Splinters of bone 
were scattered round the deep pug marks into which 
discoloured water was slowly seeping and at the edge of the 
pool was an object which had puzzled me as I came down the 
watercourse, and which I now found was part of a human leg. 

In all the subsequent years I have hunted man-eaters I have not 
seen anything as pitiful as that young comely leg— bitten off a 
little below the knee as clean as though severed by the stroke 
of an axe— out of which the warm blood was trickling. 

While looking at the leg I had forgotten all about the tigress 
until I suddenly felt that I was in great danger. Hurriedly 
grounding the butt of the rifle I put two fingers on the triggers, 
raising my head as I did so, and saw a little earth from the 
fifteen-foot bank in front of me, come rolling down the steep 
side and plop into the pool. I was new to this game of man- 
eater hunting or I should not have exposed myself to an attack 
in the way I had done. My prompt action in pointing the rifle 
upwards had possibly saved my life, and in stopping her spring, 
or in turning to get away, the tigress had dislodged the earth 
from the top of the bank. 

The bank was too steep for scrambling, and the only way of 



getting up was to take it at a run. Going up the watercourse a 
short distance I sprinted down, took the pool in my stride, and 
got far enough up the other side to grasp a bush and pull 
myself on to the bank. A bed of Strobilanthes, the bent stalks of 
which were slowly regaining their upright position, showed 
where, and how recently, the tigress had passed, and a little 
further on under an overhanging rock I found where she had 
left her kill when she came to have a look at me. 

Her tracks now— as she carried away the girl— led into a 
wilderness of rocks, some acres in extent, where the going was 
both difficult and dangerous. The cracks and chasms between 
the rocks were masked with ferns and blackberry vines, and a 
false step, which might easily have resulted in a broken limb, 
would have been fatal. Progress under these conditions was of 
necessity slow, and the tigress was taking advantage of it to 
continue her meal. A dozen times I found where she had 
rested; and after each of these rests the blood trail became 
more distinct. 

This was her four hundred and thirty-sixth human kill and she 
was quite accustomed to being disturbed at her meals by 
rescue parties, but this, I think, was the first time she had been 
followed up so persistently and she now began to show her 
resentment by growling. To appreciate a tiger's growl to the 
full it is necessary to be situated as I then was— rocks all round 
with dense vegetation between, and the imperative necessity of 
testing each footstep to avoid falling headlong into unseen 
chasms and caves. 

I cannot expect you who read this at your fireside to appreciate 
my feelings at the time. The sound of the growling and the 
expectation of an attack terrified me at the same time as it 
gave me hope. If the tigress lost her temper sufficiently to 
launch an attack, it would not only give me an opportunity of 
accomplishing the object for which I had come, but it would 
enable me to get even with her for all the pain and suffering 
she had caused. 



The growling, however, was only a gesture, and when she 
found that instead of shooing me off it was bringing me faster 
on her heels, she abandoned it. 

I had now been on her track for over four hours. Though I had 
repeatedly seen the undergrowth moving I had not seen so 
much as a hair of her hide, and a glance at the shadows 
climbing up the opposite hillside warned me it was time to 
retrace my steps if I was to reach the village before dark. 

The late owner of the severed leg was a Hindu, and some 
portion of her would be needed for the cremation, so as I 
passed the pool I dug a hole in the bank and buried the leg 
where it would be safe from the tigress, and could be found 
when wanted. 

My companion on the rock was very relieved to see me. My 
long absence, and the growling he had heard, had convinced 
him that the tigress had secured another kill and his difficulty, 
as he quite frankly admitted, was how he was going to get back 
to the village alone. 

I thought when we were climbing down the watercourse that I 
knew of no more dangerous proceeding than walking in front of 
a nervous man carrying a loaded gun, but I changed my opinion 
when on walking behind him he slipped and fell, and I saw 
where the muzzle of his gun— a converted *450 without a 
safety catch— was pointing. Since that day— except when 
accompanied by Ibbotson— I have made it a hard and fast rule 
to go alone when hunting man-eaters, for if one's companion is 
unarmed it is difficult to protect him, and if he is armed, it is 
even more difficult to protect oneself. 

Arrived at the crest of the hill, where the man had hidden his 
boots, I sat down to have a smoke and think out my plans for 
the morrow. 

The tigress would finish what was left of the kill during the 
night, and would to a certainty lie up among the rocks next day. 



On the ground she was on there was very little hope of my 
being able to stalk her, and if I disturbed her without getting a 
shot, she would probably leave the locality and I should lose 
touch with her. A beat therefore was the only thing to do, 
provided I could raise sufficient men. 

I was sitting on the south edge of a great amphitheatre of hills, 
without a habitation of any kind in sight. A stream entering 
from the west had fretted its way down, cutting a deep valley 
right across the amphitheatre. To the east the stream had 
struck solid rock, and turning north had left the amphitheatre 
by a narrow gorge. 

The hill in front of me, rising to a height of some two thousand 
feet, was clothed in short grass with a pine tree dotted here 
and there, and the hill to the east was too precipitous for 
anything but a ghooral to negotiate. If I could collect sufficient 
men to man the entire length of the ridge from the stream to 
the precipitous hill, and get them to stir up the tigress, her 
most natural line of retreat would be through the narrow 
gorge. 

Admittedly a very difficult beat, for the steep hillside facing 
north, on which I had left the tigress, was densely wooded and 
roughly three-quarters of a mile long and half-a-mile wide; 
however, if I could get the beaters to carry out instructions, 
there was a reasonable chance of my getting a shot. 

The Tahsildar was waiting for me at the village. I explained the 
position to him, and asked him to take immediate steps to 
collect as many men as he could, and to meet me at the tree 
where the girl had been killed at ten o'clock the following 
morning. Promising to do his best, he left for Champawat, 
while I climbed the hill to the bungalow. 

I was up at crack of dawn next morning, and after a substantial 
meal told my men to pack up and wait for me at Champawat, 
and went down to have another look at the ground I intended 
beating. I could find nothing wrong with the plans I had made. 



and an hour before my time I was at the spot where I had asked 
the Tahsildar to meet me. 

That he would have a hard time in collecting the men I had no 
doubt, for the fear of the man-eater had sunk deep into the 
countryside and more than mild persuasion would be needed to 
make the men leave the shelter of their homes. At ten o'clock 
the Tahsildar and one man turned up, and thereafter the men 
came in twos, and threes, and tens, until by midday two 
hundred and ninety-eight had collected. 

The Tahsildar had let it be known that he would turn a blind 
eye towards all unlicensed fire-arms, and further that he would 
provide ammunition where required; and the weapons that 
were produced that day would have stocked a museum. 

When the men were assembled and had received the 
ammunition they needed I took them to the brow of the hill 
where the girl's skirt was lying, and pointing to a pine tree on 
the opposite hill that had been struck by lightning and stripped 
of bark, I told them to line themselves up along the ridge and, 
when they saw me wave a handkerchief from under the pine, 
those of them who were armed were to fire off their pieces, 
while the others beat drums, shouted, and rolled down rocks, 
and that no one was on any account to leave the ridge until I 
returned and personally collected him. When I was assured 
that all present had heard and understood my instructions, I 
set off with the Tahsildar, who said he would be safer with me 
than with the beaters whose guns would probably burst and 
cause many casualties. 

Making a wide detour I crossed the upper end of the valley, 
gained the opposite hill, and made my way down to the blasted 
pine. From here the hill went steeply down and the Tahsildar, 
who had on a thin pair of patent leather shoes, said it was 
impossible for him to go any further. While he was removing his 
inadequate foot-gear to ease his blisters, the men on the ridge, 
thinking I had forgotten to give the pre-arranged signal, fired 
off their guns and set up a great shout. I was still a hundred 



and fifty yards from the gorge, and that I did not break my 
neck a dozen times in covering this distance was due to my 
having been brought up on the hills, and being in consequence 
as sure-footed as a goat. 

As I ran down the hill I noticed that there was a patch of green 
grass near the mouth of the gorge, and as there was no time to 
look round for a better place, I sat down in the grass, with my 
back to the hill down which I had just come. The grass was 
about two feet high and hid half my body, and if I kept perfectly 
still there was a good chance of my not being seen. Facing me 
was the hill that was being beaten, and the gorge that I hoped 
the tigress would make for was behind my left shoulder. 

Pandemonium had broken loose on the ridge. Added to the 
fusillade of guns was the wild beating of drums and the 
shouting of hundreds of men, and when the din was at its worst 
I caught sight of the tigress bounding down a grassy slope 
between two ravines to my right front, and about three 
hundred yards away. She had only gone a short distance when 
the Tahsildar from his position under the pine let off both 
barrels of his short-gun. On hearing the shots the tigress 
whipped round and went straight back the way she had come, 
and as she disappeared into thick cover I threw up my rifle and 
sent a despairing bullet after her. 

The men on the ridge, hearing the three shots, not unnaturally 
concluded that the tigress had been killed. They emptied all 
their guns and gave a final yell, and I was holding my breath 
and listening for the screams that would herald the tigress's 
arrival on the ridge, when she suddenly broke cover to my left 
front and, taking the stream at a bound, came straight for the 
gorge. The *500 modified cordite rifle, sighted at sea level, 
shot high at this altitude, and when the tigress stopped dead I 
thought the bullet had gone over her back, and that she had 
pulled up on finding her retreat cut off; as a matter of fact I 
had hit her all right, but a little far back. Lowering her head, 
she half turned towards me, giving me a beautiful shot at the 



point of her shoulder at a range of less than thirty yards. She 
flinched at this second shot but continued, with her ears laid 
flat and bared teeth, to stand her ground, while I sat with rifle 
to shoulder trying to think what it would be best for me to do 
when she charged, for the rifle was empty and I had no more 
cartridges. Three cartridges were all that I had brought with 
me, for I never thought I should get a chance of firing more 
than two shots, and the third cartridge was for— an emergency. 

Fortunately the wounded animal most unaccountably decided 
against a charge. Very slowly she turned, crossed the stream to 
her right, climbed over some fallen rocks, and found a narrow 
ledge that went diagonally up and across the face of the 
precipitous hill to where there was a great flat projecting rock. 
Where this rock joined the cliff a small bush had found root- 
hold, and going up to it the tigress started to strip its branches. 
Throwing caution to the winds I shouted to the Tahsildar to 
bring me his gun. A long reply was shouted back, the only word 
of which I caught was 'feet 1 : Laying down my rifle I took the hill 
at a run, grabbed the gun out of the Tahsildar's hands and 
raced back. 

As I approached the stream the tigress left the bush and came 
out on the projecting rock towards me. When I was within 
twenty feet of her I raised the gun and found to my horror that 
there was a gap of about three-eighths of an inch between the 
barrels and the breech-block. The gun had not burst when both 
barrels had been fired, and would probably not burst now, but 
there was danger of being blinded by a blow back. However, 
the risk would have to be taken, and, aligning the great blob of 
a bead that did duty as a sight on the tigress's open mouth, I 
fired. Maybe I bobbed, or maybe the gun was not capable of 
throwing the cylindrical bullet accurately for twenty feet; 
anyway, the missile missed the tigress's mouth and struck her 
on the right paw, from where I removed it later with my finger¬ 
nails. Fortunately she was at her last gasp, and the tap on the 
foot was sufficient to make her lurch forward. She came to rest 
with her head projecting over the side of the rock. 



From the moment the tigress had broken cover in her attempt 
to get through the gorge I had forgotten the beaters, until I 
was suddenly reminded of their existence by hearing a shout, 
from a short distance up the hill, of 'There it is on the rock! Pull 
it down and let us hack it to bits. 1 I could not believe my ears 
when I heard 'hack it to bits', and yet I had heard aright, for 
others now had caught sight of the tigress and from all over the 
hillside the shout was being repeated. 

The ledge by which the wounded animal had gained the 
projecting rock was fortunately on the opposite side from the 
beaters, and was just wide enough to permit my shuffling along 
it sideways. As I reached the rock and stepped over the tigress 
— hoping devoutly she was dead for I had not had time to carry 
out the usual test of pelting her with stones— the men emerged 
from the forest and came running across the open, brandishing 
guns, axes, rusty swords, and spears. 

At the rock, which was twelve to fourteen feet in height, their 
advance was checked, for the outer face had been worn smooth 
by the stream when in spate and afforded no foothold even for 
their bare toes. The rage of the crowd on seeing their dread 
enemy was quite understandable, for there was not a man 
among them who had not suffered at her hands. One man, who 
appeared demented and was acting as ring-leader, was 
shouting over and over again as he ran to and fro brandishing a 
sword, 'This is the shaitan (Devil) that killed my wife and my 
two sons/ As happens with crowds, the excitement died down 
as suddenly as it had flared up, and to the credit of the man 
who had lost his wife and sons be it said that he was the first to 
lay down his weapon. He came near to the rock and said, 'We 
were mad, sahib, when we saw our enemy, but the madness has 
now passed, and we ask you and the Tahsildar sahib to forgive 
us/ Extracting the unspent cartridge, I laid the gun across the 
tigress and hung down by my hands and was assisted to the 
ground. When I showed the men how I had gained the rock the 
dead animal was very gently lowered and carried to an open 
spot, where all could crowd round and look at her. 



When the tigress had stood on the rock looking down at me I 
had noticed that there was something wrong with her mouth, 
and on examining her now I found that the upper and lower 
canine teeth on the right side of her mouth were broken, the 
upper one in half, and the lower one right down to the bone. 
This permanent injury to her teeth— the result of a gun-shot 
wound— had prevented her from killing her natural prey, and 
had been the cause of her becoming a man-eater. 

The men begged me not to skin the tigress there, and asked me 
to let them have her until nightfall to carry through their 
villages, saying that if their womenfolk and children did not see 
her with their own eyes, they would not believe that their dread 
enemy was dead. 

Two saplings were now cut and laid one on either side of the 
tigress, and with pugrees, waistbands and loincloths she was 
carefully and very securely lashed to them. When all was ready 
the saplings were manned and we moved to the foot of the 
precipitous hill; the men preferred to take the tigress up this 
hill, on the far side of which their villages lay, to going up the 
densely wooded hill which they had just beaten. Two human 
ropes were made by the simple expedient of the man behind 
taking a firm grip of the waistband, or other portion of 
clothing, of the man in front of him. When it was considered 
that the ropes were long and strong enough to stand the strain, 
they attached themselves to the saplings, and with men on 
either side to hold the feet of the bearers and give them 
foothold, the procession moved up the hill, looking for all the 
world like an army of ants carrying a beetle up the face of a 
wall. Behind the main army was a second and a smaller one— 
the Tahsildar being carried up. Had the ropes broken at any 
stage of that thousand-foot climb, the casualties would have 
been appalling, but the rope did not break. The men gained the 
crest of the hill and set off eastwards, singing on their 
triumphal march, while the Tahsildar and I turned west and 
made for Champawat. 



Our way lay along the ridge and once again I stood among the 
blackthorn bushes on the thorns of which long tresses of the 
girl's hair had caught, and for the last time looked down into 
the amphitheatre which had been the scene of our recent 
exploit. 

On the way down the hill the beaters had found the head of the 
unfortunate girl, and a thin column of smoke rising straight up 
into the still air from the mouth of the gorge showed where the 
relations were performing the last rites of the Champawat man- 
eater's last victim, on the very spot on which the man-eater had 
been shot. 

After dinner, while I was standing in the courtyard of the 
Tahsil, I saw a long procession of pine torches winding its way 
down the opposite hillside, and presently the chanting of a hill 
song by a great concourse of men was borne up on the still 
night air. An hour later, the tigress was laid down at my feet. 

It was difficult to skin the animal with so many people 
crowding round, and to curtail the job I cut the head and paws 
from the trunk and left them adhering to the skin, to be dealt 
with later. A police guard was then mounted over the carcass, 
and next day, when all the people of the countryside were 
assembled, the trunk, legs and tail of the tigress were cut up 
into small pieces and distributed. These pieces of flesh and 
bone were required for the lockets which hill children wear 
round their necks, and the addition of a piece of tiger to the 
other potent charms is credited with giving the wearer 
courage, as well as immunity from the attacks of wild animals. 
The fingers of the girl which the tigress had swallowed whole 
were sent to me in spirits by the Tahsildar, and were buried by 
me in the Naini Tal lake close to the Nandadevi temples. 

While I had been skinning the tigress the Tahsildar and his 
staff, assisted by the Headmen and greybeards of the 
surrounding villages and merchants of the Champawat bazaar, 
had been busy drawing up a programme for a great feast and 
dance for the morrow, at which I was to preside. Round about 



midnight, when the last of the great throng of men had left 
with shouts of delight at being able to use roads and village 
paths that the man-eater had closed for four years, I had a final 
smoke with the Tahsildar, and telling him that I could not stay 
any longer and that he would have to take my place at the 
festivities, my men and I set off on our seventy-five-mile 
journey, with two days in hand to do it in. 

At sunrise I left my men and, with the tigress's skin strapped to 
the saddle of my horse, rode on ahead to put in a few hours in 
cleaning the skin at Dabidhura, where I intended spending the 
night. When passing the hut on the hill at Pali it occurred to me 
that it would be some little satisfaction to the dumb woman to 
know that her sister had been avenged, so leaving the horse to 
browse— he had been bred near the snow-line and could eat 
anything from oak trees to nettles— I climbed the hill to the 
hut, and spread out the skin with the head supported on a 
stone facing the door. The children of the house had been 
round-eyed spectators of these proceedings and, hearing me 
talking to them, their mother, who was inside cooking, came to 
the door. 

I am not going to hazard any theories about shock, and 
counter-shock, for I know nothing of these matters. All I know 
is that this woman, who was alleged to have been dumb a 
twelvemonth and who four days previously had made no 
attempt to answer any questions, was now running backwards 
and forwards from the hut to the road calling to her husband 
and the people in the village to come quickly and see what the 
sahib had brought. This sudden return of speech appeared 
greatly to mystify the children, who could not take their eyes 
off their mother's face. 

I rested in the village while a dish of tea was being prepared 
for me and told the people who thronged round how the man- 
eater had been killed. An hour later I continued my journey and 
for half a mile along my way I could hear the shouts of goodwill 
of the men of Pali. 



I had a very thrilling encounter with a leopard the following 
morning, which I only mention because it delayed my start 
from Dabidhura and put an extra strain on my small mount and 
myself. Fortunately the little pony was as strong on his legs as 
he was tough inside, and by holding his tail on the up-grades, 
riding him on the flat, and running behind him on the down¬ 
grades, we covered the forty-five miles to Naini Tal between 9 
a.m. and 6 p.m. 

At a durbar held in Naini Tal a few months later Sir John 
Hewett, Lieutenant-Governor of the United Provinces, 
presented the Tahsildar of Champawat with a gun, and the man 
who accompanied me when I was looking for the girl with a 
beautiful hunting-knife, for the help they had given me. Both 
weapons were suitably engraved and will be handed down as 
heirlooms in the respective families. 



Robin 

I NEVER saw either of his parents. The Knight of the Broom I 
purchased him from said he was a spaniel, that his name was 
Pincha, and that his father was a 'keen gun dog'. This is all I 
can tell you about his pedigree. 

I did not want a pup, and it was quite by accident that I 
happened to be with a friend when the litter of seven was 
decanted from a very filthy basket for her inspection. Pincha 
was the smallest and the thinnest of the litter, and it was quite 
evident he had reached the last ditch in his fight for survival. 
Leaving his little less miserable brothers and sisters, he walked 
once round me, and then curled himself up between my big 
feet. When I picked him up and put him inside my coat— it was 
a bitterly cold morning— he tried to show his gratitude by 
licking my face, and I tried to show him I was not aware of his 
appalling stench. 

He was rising three months then, and I bought him for fifteen 
rupees. He is rising thirteen years now, and all the gold in India 
would not buy him. 

When I got him home and he had made his first acquaintance 
with a square meal, warm water and soap, we scrapped his 
kennel name of Pincha and rechristened him Robin, in memory 
of a faithful old collie who had saved my young brother, aged 
four, and myself, aged six, from the attack of an infuriated she- 
bear. 

Robin responded to regular meals as parched land does to rain, 
and after he had been with us for a few weeks, acting on the 
principle that a boy's and a pup's training cannot be started too 
early, I took him out one morning, intending to get a little away 
from him and fire a shot or two to get him used to the sound of 
gunfire. 

At the lower end of our estate there are some dense thorn 
bushes, and while I was skirting round them a peafowl got up, 
and forgetting all about Robin, who was following at heel, I 



brought the bird fluttering down. It landed in the thorn bushes 
and Robin dashed in after it. The bushes were too thick and 
thorny for me to enter them, so I ran round to the far side 
where beyond the bushes was open ground, and beyond that 
again heavy tree and grass jungle which I knew the wounded 
bird would make for. The open ground was flooded with 
morning sunlight, and if I had been armed with a movie camera 
I should have had an opportunity of securing a unique picture. 
The peafowl, an old hen, with neck feathers stuck out at right 
angles, and one wing broken, was making for the tree jungle, 
while Robin, with stern to the ground, was hanging on to her 
tail and being dragged along. Running forward I very foolishly 
caught the bird by the neck and lifted it clear of the ground, 
whereon it promptly lashed out with both legs, and sent Robin 
heels-over-head. In a second he was up and on his feet again, 
and when I laid the dead bird down, he danced round it making 
little dabs alternately at its head and tail. The lesson was over 
for that morning, and as we returned home it would have been 
difficult to say which of us was the more proud— Robin, at 
bringing home his first bird, or I, at having picked a winner out 
of a filthy basket. The shooting season was now drawing to a 
close, and for the next few days Robin was not given anything 
larger than quail, doves and an occasional partridge to 
retrieve. 

We spent the summer on the hills, and on our annual migration 
to the foothills in November, at the end of a long fifteen-mile 
march as we turned a sharp corner, one of a big troop of 
langurs jumped off the hillside and crossed the road a few 
inches in front of Robin's nose. Disregarding my whistle, Robin 
dashed down the roadside after the langur, which promptly 
sought safety in a tree. The ground was open with a few trees 
here and there, and after going steeply down for thirty or forty 
yards flattened out for a few yards, before going sharply down 
into the valley below. On the right-hand side of this flat ground 
there were a few bushes, with a deep channel scoured out by 
rain-water running through them. Robin had hardly entered 



these bushes when he was out again, and with ears laid back 
and tail tucked in was running for dear life, with an enormous 
leopard bounding after him and gaining on him at every bound. 
I was unarmed and all the assistance I could render was to 1 Ho 
1 and 1 Har ' at the full extent of my lungs. The men carrying 
M.'s dandy joined in lustily, the pandemonium reaching its 
climax when the hundred or more langurs added their alarm- 
calls in varying keys. For twenty-five or thirty yards the 
desperate and unegual race continued, and just as the leopard 
was within reach of Robin, it unaccountably swerved and 
disappeared into the valley, while Robin circled round a 
shoulder of the hill and rejoined us on the road. Two very 
useful lessons Robin learned from his hairbreadth escape, 
which he never in after-life forgot. First, that it was dangerous 
to chase langurs, and second that the alarm-call of a langur 
denoted the presence of a leopard. 

Robin resumed his training where it had been interrupted in 
spring, but it soon became apparent that his early neglect and 
starvation had affected his heart, for he fainted now after the 
least exertion. 

There is nothing more disappointing for a gun dog than to be 
left at home when his master goes out, and as bird-shooting 
was now taboo for Robin, I started taking him with me when I 
went out after big game. He took to this new form of sport as 
readily as a duck takes to water, and from then on has 
accompanied me whenever I have been out with a rifle. 

The method we employ is to go out early in the morning, pick 
up the tracks of a leopard or tiger, and follow them. When the 
pug marks can be seen, I do the tracking, and when the animal 
we are after takes to the jungle, Robin does the tracking. In 
this way we have on occasions followed an animal for miles 
before coming up with it. 

When shooting on foot, it is very much easier to kill an animal 
outright than when shooting down on it from a machan, or from 
the back of an elephant. For one thing, when wounded animals 



have to be followed up on foot, chance shots are not indulged 
in, and for another, the vital parts are more accessible when 
shooting on the same level as the animal than when shooting 
down on it. However, even after exercising the greatest care 
over the shot, I have sometimes only wounded leopards and 
tigers, who have rampaged round before being quietened by a 
second or third shot, and only once during all the years that we 
have shot together has Robin left me in a tight corner. When he 
rejoined me after his brief absence that day, we decided that 
the incident was closed and would never be referred to again, 
but we are older now and possibly less sensitive, anyway Robin 
— who has exceeded the canine equivalent of three-score- 
years-and-ten, and who, lies at my feet as I write, on a bed he 
will never again leave— has with a smile from his wise brown 
eyes and a wag of his small stump of a tail given me permission 
to go ahead and tell you the story. 

We did not see the leopard until it stepped clear of the thick 
undergrowth and, coming to a stand, looked back over its left 
shoulder. 

He was an outsized male with a beautiful dark glossy coat, the 
rosettes on his skin standing out like clear-cut designs on a rich 
velvet ground. I had an unhurried shot with an accurate rifle at 
his right shoulder, at the short range of fifteen yards. By how 
little I missed his heart makes no matter, and while the bullet 
was kicking up the dust fifty yards away he was high in the air, 
and, turning a somersault, landed in the thick undergrowth he 
had a minute before left. For twenty, forty, fifty yards we heard 
him crashing through the cover, and then the sound ceased as 
abruptly as it had begun. This sudden cessation of sound could 
be accounted for in two ways: either the leopard had collapsed 
and died in his tracks, or fifty yards away he had reached open 
ground. 

We had walked far that day; the sun was near setting and we 
were still four miles from home. This part of the jungle was not 
frequented by man, and there was not one chance in a million 



of anyone passing that way by night, and last, and the best 
reason of all for leaving the leopard, M. was unarmed and 
could neither be left alone nor taken along to follow up the 
wounded animal— so we turned to the north and made for 
home. There was no need for me to mark the spot, for I had 
walked through these jungles by day— and often by night— for 
near on half a century, and could have found my way blind-fold 
to any part of them. 

Night had only just given place to day the following morning 
when Robin— who had not been with us the previous evening— 
and I arrived at the spot I had fired from. Very warily Robin, 
who was leading, examined the ground where the leopard had 
stood, and then raising his head and snuffing the air he 
advanced to the edge of the undergrowth, where the leopard in 
falling had left great splashes of blood. There was no need for 
me to examine the blood to determine the position of the 
wound, for at the short range I had fired at I had seen the 
bullet strike, and the spurt of dust on the far side was proof 
that the bullet had gone right through the leopard's body. 

It might be necessary later on to follow up the blood trail, but 
just at present a little rest after our four-mile walk in the dark 
would do no harm, and might on the other hand prove of great 
value to us. The sun was near rising, and at that early hour of 
the morning all the jungle folk were on the move, and it would 
be advisable to hear what they had to say on the subject of the 
wounded animal before going further. 

Under a nearby tree I found a dry spot to which the saturating 
dew had not penetrated, and with Robin stretched out at my 
feet had finished my cigarette when a chital hind, and then a 
second and a third, started calling some sixty yards to our left 
front. Robin sat up and slowly turning his head looked at me, 
and, on catching my eye, as slowly turned back in the direction 
of the calling deer. He had travelled far along the road of 
experience since that day he had first heard the alarm-call of a 
langur, and he knew now— as did every bird and animal within 



hearing— that the chital were warning the jungle folk of the 
presence of a leopard. 

From the manner in which the chital were calling it was 
evident that the leopard was in full view of them. A little more 
patience and they would tell us if he was alive. They had been 
calling for about five minutes when suddenly and all together, 
they called once and again, and then settled down to their 
regular call; the leopard was alive and had moved, and was 
now quiet again. All that we needed to know now was the 
position of the leopard, and this information we could get by 
stalking the chital. 

Moving down-wind for fifty yards we entered the thick 
undergrowth, and started to stalk the deer not a difficult task, 
for Robin can move through any jungle as silently as a cat, and 
long practice has taught me where to place my feet. The chital 
were not visible until we were within a few feet of them. They 
were standing in the open and looking towards the north in the 
exact direction, as far as I was able to judge, in which the 
crashing sound of the evening before had ceased. 

Up to this point the chital had been of great help to us; they 
had told us the leopard was lying out in the open and that it 
was alive, and they had now given us the direction. It had taken 
us the best part of an hour to acquire this information, and if 
the chital now caught sight of us and warned the jungle folk of 
our presence, they would in one second undo the good they had 
so far done. I was debating whether it would be better to 
retrace our steps and work down below the calling deer and try 
to get a shot from behind them, or move them from our vicinity 
by giving the call of a leopard, when one of the hinds turned 
her head and looked straight into my face. Next second, with a 
cry of 'Ware man', they dashed away at top speed. I had only 
about five yards to cover to reach the open ground, but quick 
as I was the leopard was quicker, and I was only in time to see 
his hind quarters and tail disappearing behind some bushes. 

The chital had very effectively spoilt my chance of a shot, and 



the leopard would now have to be located and marked down all 
over again— this time by Robin. 

I stood on the open ground for some minutes, to give the 
leopard time to settle down and the scent he had left in his 
passage to blow past us, and then took Robin due west across 
the track of the wind, which was blowing from the north. We 
had gone about sixty or seventy yards when Robin, who was 
leading, stopped and turned to face into the wind. Robin is 
mute in the jungles, and has a wonderful control over his 
nerves. There is one nerve, however, running down the back of 
his hind legs, which he cannot control when he is looking at a 
leopard, or when the scent of a leopard is warm and strong. 
This nerve was now twitching, and agitating the long hair on 
the upper part of his hind legs. 

A very violent cyclonic storm had struck this part of the forest 
the previous summer, uprooting a number of trees; it was 
towards one of these fallen trees, forty yards from where we 
were standing, that Robin was now looking. The branches were 
towards us, and on either side of the trunk there were light 
bushes and a few scattered tufts of short grass. 

At any other time Robin and I would have made straight for our 
quarry; but on this occasion a little extra caution was 
advisable. Not only were we dealing with an animal who when 
wounded knows no fear, but in addition we were dealing with a 
leopard who had had fifteen hours in which to nurse his 
grievance against man, and who could in consequence be 
counted on to have all his fighting instincts thoroughly aroused. 

When leaving home that morning I had picked up the *275 rifle 
I had used the previous evening. A good rifle to carry when 
miles have to be covered, but not the weapon one would select 
to deal with a wounded leopard; so instead of a direct 
approach, I picked a line that would take us fifteen yards from, 
and parallel to, the fallen tree. Step by step, Robin leading, we 
moved along this line, and had passed the branches and were 
opposite the trunk when Robin stopped. Taking the direction 



from him, I presently saw what had attracted his attention— 
the tip of the leopard's tail slowly raised, and as slowly lowered 
— the warning a leopard invariably gives before charging. 
Pivoting to the right on my heels, I had just got the rifle to my 
shoulder when the leopard burst through the intervening 
bushes and sprang at us. My bullet, fired more with the object 
of deflecting him than with any hope of killing or even hitting 
him, passed under his belly and went through the fleshy part of 
his left thigh. The crack of the rifle, more than the wound, had 
the effect of deflecting the leopard sufficiently to make him 
pass my right shoulder without touching me, and before I could 
get in another shot, he disappeared into the bushes beyond. 

Robin had not moved from my feet, and together we now 
examined the ground the leopard had passed over. Blood we 
found in plenty, but whether it had come from the old wounds 
torn open by the leopard's violent exertions, or from my recent 
shot, it was impossible to say. Anyway it made no difference to 
Robin, who without a moment's hesitation took up the trail. 
After going through some very heavy cover we came on knee- 
high undergrowth, and had proceeded about a couple of 
hundred yards when I saw the leopard get up in front of us, and 
before I could get the rifle to bear on him, he disappeared 
under a lantana bush. This bush with its branches resting on 
the ground was as big as a cottage tent, and in addition to 
affording the leopard ideal cover gave him all the advantages 
for launching his next attack. 

Robin and I had come very well out of our morning's adventure 
and it would have been foolish now, armed as I was, to pursue 
the leopard further, so without more ado we turned about and 
made for home. 

Next morning we were back on the ground. From a very early 
hour Robin had been agitating to make a start, and, ignoring all 
the interesting smells the jungle holds in the morning, would 
have made me do the four miles at a run had that been 
possible. 



I had armed myself with a 450/400, and was in consequence 
feeling much happier than I had done the previous day. When 
we were several hundred yards from the lantana bush, I made 
Robin slow down and advance cautiously, for it is never safe to 
assume that a wounded animal will be found where it has been 
left hours previously, as the following regrettable incident 
shows. 

A sportsman of my acquaintance wounded a tiger one 
afternoon, and followed the blood trail for several miles along a 
valley. Next morning, accompanied by a number of men, one of 
whom was carrying his empty rifle and leading the way, he set 
out intending to take up the tracking where he had left off. His 
way led over the previous day's blood trail, and while still a 
mile from the spot where the tiger had been left, the leading 
man, who incidentally was the local shikari, walked on to the 
wounded tiger and was killed. The rest of the party escaped, 
some by climbing trees and others by showing a clean pair of 
heels. 

I had marked the exact position of the lantana bush, and now 
took Robin along a line that would pass a few yards on the lee 
side of it. Robin knew all that was worth knowing about this 
method of locating the position of an animal by cutting across 
the wind, and we had only gone a short distance, and were still 
a hundred yards from the bush, when he stopped, turned and 
faced into the wind, and communicated to me that he could 
smell the leopard. As on the previous day, he was facing a 
fallen tree which was lying along the edge of, and parallel to, 
the thick undergrowth through which we had followed the 
leopard to the lantana bush after he had charged us. On our 
side of the tree the ground was open, but on the far side there 
was a dense growth of waist-high basonta bushes. Having 
signalled to Robin to carry on along our original line, we went 
past the lantana bush, in which he showed no interest, to a 
channel washed out by rain-water. Here, removing my coat, I 
filled it with as many stones as the stitches would hold, and 
with this improvised sack slung over my shoulder returned to 



the open ground near the tree. 

Resuming my coat, and holding the rifle ready for instant use, I 
took up a position fifteen yards from the tree and started 
throwing the stones, first on to the tree and then into the 
bushes on the far side of it with the object of making the 
leopard— assuming he was still alive— charge on to the open 
ground where I could deal with him. When all my ammunition 
was exhausted I coughed, clapped my hands, and shouted, and 
neither during the bombardment nor after it did the leopard 
move or make any sound to indicate that he was alive. 

I should now have been justified in walking straight up to the 
tree and looking on the far side of it, but remembering an old 
jungle saying, 'It is never safe to assume that a leopard is dead 
until it has been skinned ', I set out to circle round the tree, 
intending to reduce the size of the circle until I could see right 
under the branches and along the whole length of the trunk. I 
made the radius of the first circle about twenty-five yards, and 
had gone two-thirds of the way round when Robin stopped. As I 
looked down to see what had attracted his attention, there was 
a succession of deep-throated, angry grunts, and the leopard 
made straight for us. All I could see was the undergrowth being 
violently agitated in a direct line towards us, and I only just had 
time to swing half right and bring the rifle up, when the head 
and shoulders of the leopard appeared out of the bushes a few 
feet away. 

The leopard's spring and my shot were simultaneous, and side¬ 
stepping to the left and leaning back as far as I could I fired the 
second barrel from my hip into his side as he passed me. 

When a wounded animal, be he leopard or tiger, makes a 
headlong charge and fails to contact he invariably carries on 
and does not return to the attack until he is again disturbed. 

I had side-stepped to the left to avoid crushing Robin, and 
when I looked down for him now, he was nowhere to be seen. 
For the first time in all the years we had hunted together we 



had parted company in a tight corner, and he was now probably 
trying to find his way home, with very little chance of being 
able to avoid the many dangers that lay before him in the 
intervening four miles of jungle. Added to the natural dangers 
he would have to face in a jungle with which, owing to its 
remoteness from home, he was not familiar, was the weak 
condition of his heart. And it was therefore with very great 
misgivings that I turned about to go in search of him; as I did 
so, I caught sight of his head projecting from behind a tree 
trunk at the edge of a small clearing only a hundred yards 
away. When I raised my hand and beckoned, he disappeared 
into the undergrowth, but a little later, with drooped eyes and 
drooping ears, he crept silently to my feet. Laying down the 
rifle I picked him up in my arms and, for the second time in his 
life, he licked my face— telling me as he did so, with little 
throaty sounds, how glad he was to find me unhurt, and how 
terribly ashamed he was of himself for having parted company 
from me. 

Our reactions to the sudden and quite unexpected danger that 
had confronted us were typical of how a canine and a human 
being act in an emergency, when the danger that threatens is 
heard, and not seen. In Robin's case it had impelled him to seek 
safety in silent and rapid retreat; whereas in my case it had the 
effect of gluing my feet to the ground and making retreat- 
rapid or otherwise— impossible. 

When I had satisfied Robin that he was not to blame for our 
temporary separation, and his small body had stopped 
trembling, I put him down and together we walked up to where 
the leopard, who had put up such a game fight, and had so 
nearly won the last round, was lying dead. 

I have told you the story, and while I have been telling it Robin 
— the biggest-hearted and the most faithful friend man ever 
had— has gone to the Happy Hunting Grounds, where I know I 
shall find him waiting for me. 



The Chowgarh Tigers 

I 

THE map of Eastern Kumaon that hangs on the wall before me 
is marked with a number of crosses, and below each cross is a 
date. These crosses indicate the locality, and the date, of the 
officially recorded human victims of the man-eating tiger of 
Chowgarh. There are sixty-four crosses on the map. I do not 
claim this as being a correct tally, for the map was posted up by 
me for two years and during this period all kills were not 
reported to me; further, victims who were only mauled, and 
who died subsequently, have not been awarded a cross and a 
date. 

The first cross is dated 15 December 1925, and the last, 21 
March 1930. The distance between the extreme crosses, north 
to south, is fifty miles, and east to west, thirty miles, an area of 
1,500 square miles of mountain and vale where the snow lies 
deep during winter, and the valleys are scorching hot in 
summer. Over this area the Chowgarh tiger had established a 
reign of terror. Villages of varying size, some with a population 
of a hundred or more, and others with only a small family or 
two, are scattered throughout the area. Footpaths, beaten hard 
by bare feet, connect the villages. Some of these paths pass 
through thick forests, and when a man-eater renders their 
passage dangerous inter-village communication is carried on 
by shouting. Standing on a commanding point, maybe a big 
rock or the roof of a house, a man cooees to attract the 
attention of the people in a neighbouring village, and when the 
cooee is answered, the message is shouted across in a high- 
pitched voice. From village to village the message is tossed, 
and is broadcast throughout large areas in an incredibly short 
space of time. 

It was at a District Conference in February 1929 that I found 
myself committed to have a try for this tiger. There were at that 
time three man-eaters in the Kumaon Division, and as the 
Chowgarh tiger had done most damage I promised to go in 



pursuit of it first. 

The map with the crosses and dates, furnished to me by 
Government, showed that the man-eater was most active in the 
villages on the north and east face of the Kala Agar ridge. This 
ridge, some forty miles in length, rises to a height of 8,500 feet 
and is thickly wooded along the crest. A forest road runs along 
the north face of the ridge, in some places passing for miles 
through dense forests of oak and rhododendron, and in others 
forming a boundary between the forest and cultivated land. In 
one place the road forms a loop, and in this loop is situated the 
Kala Agar Forest Bungalow. This bungalow was my objective, 
and after a four days' march, culminating in a stiff climb of 
4,000 feet, I arrived at it one evening in April 1929. The last 
human victim in this area was a young man of twenty-two, who 
had been killed while out grazing cattle, and while I was having 
breakfast, the morning after my arrival, the grandmother of the 
young man came to see me. 

She informed me that the man-eater had, without any 
provocation, killed the only relative she had in the world. After 
giving me her grandson's history from the day he was born, 
and extolling his virtues, she pressed me to accept her three 
milch buffaloes to use as bait for the tiger, saying that if I killed 
the tiger with the help of her buffaloes she would have the 
satisfaction of feeling that she had assisted in avenging her 
grandson. These full-grown animals were of no use to me, but 
knowing that refusal to accept them would give offence, I 
thanked the old lady and assured her I would draw on her for 
bait as soon as I had used up the four young male buffaloes I 
had brought with me from Naini Tal. The Headmen of nearby 
villages had now assembled, and from them I learned that the 
tiger had last been seen ten days previously in a village twenty 
miles away, on the eastern slope of the ridge, where it had 
killed and eaten a man and his wife. 

A trail ten days old was not worth following up, and after a long 
discussion with the Headmen I decided to make for Dalkania 



village on the eastern side of the ridge. Dalkania is ten miles 
from Kala Agar, and about the same distance from the village 
where the man and his wife had been killed. 

From the number of crosses Dalkania and the villages adjoining 
it had earned, it appeared that the tiger had its headquarters in 
the vicinity of these villages. 

After breakfast next morning I left Kala Agar and followed the 
forest road, which I was informed would take me to the end of 
the ridge, where I should have to leave the road and take a 
path two miles downhill to Dalkania. This road, running right to 
the end of the ridge through dense forest was very little used, 
and, examining it for tracks as I went along, I arrived at the 
point where the path took off at about 2 p.m. Here I met a 
number of men from Dalkania. They had heard— via the cooee 
method of communication— of my intention of camping at their 
village and had come up to the ridge to inform me that the 
tiger had that morning attacked a party of women, while they 
had been cutting their crops in a village ten miles to the north 
of Dalkania. 

The men carrying my camp equipment had done eight miles 
and were quite willing to carry on, but on learning from the 
villagers that the path to this village, ten miles away, was very 
rough and ran through dense forest I decided to send my men 
with the villagers to Dalkania, and visit the scene of the tiger's 
attack alone. My servant immediately set about preparing a 
substantial meal for me, and at 3 p.m., having fortified myself, I 
set out on my ten-mile walk. Ten miles under favourable 
conditions is a comfortable two-and-a-half hours' walk, but here 
the conditions were anything but favourable. The track running 
along the east face of the hill wound in and out through deep 
ravines and was bordered alternately by rocks, dense 
undergrowth, and trees; and when every obstruction capable of 
concealing sudden death, in the form of a hungry man-eater, 
had to be approached with caution, progress was of necessity 
slow. I was still several miles from my objective when the 



declining day warned me it was time to call a halt. 

In any other area, sleeping under the stars on a bed of dry 
leaves would have ensured a restful night, but here, to sleep on 
the ground would have been to court death in a very 
unpleasant form. Long practice in selecting a suitable tree, and 
the ability to dispose myself comfortably in it, has made 
sleeping up aloft a simple matter. On this occasion I selected an 
oak tree, and, with the rifle tied securely to a branch, had been 
asleep for some hours when I was awakened by the rustling of 
several animals under the tree. The sound moved on, and 
presently I heard the scraping of claws on bark and realized 
that a family of bears were climbing some karphal trees 
(Karphal is found on our hills at an elevation of 6,000 feet. The 
tree grows to a height of about forty feet and produces a small 
red and very sweet berry, which is greatly fancied by both 
human beings and bears.) I had noticed growing a little way 
down the hillside. Bears are very quarrelsome when feeding, 
and sleep was impossible until they had eaten their fill and 
moved on. 

The sun had been up a couple of hours when I arrived at the 
village, which consisted of two huts and a cattle-shed, in a 
clearing of five acres surrounded by forest. The small 
community were in a state of terror and were overjoyed to see 
me. The wheatfield, a few yards from the huts, where the tiger, 
with belly to ground, had been detected only just in time, 
stalking the three women cutting the crop, was eagerly pointed 
out to me. The man who had seen the tiger, and given the 
alarm, told me the tiger had retreated into the jungle, where it 
had been joined by a second tiger, and that the two animals had 
gone down the hillside into the valley below. The occupants of 
the two huts had had no sleep, for the tigers, baulked of their 
prey, had called at short intervals throughout the night, and 
had only ceased calling a little before my arrival. This 
statement, that there were two tigers, confirmed the reports I 
had already received that the man-eater was accompanied by a 
full-grown cub. 



Our hill folk are very hospitable, and when the villagers 
learned that I had spent the night in the jungle, and that my 
camp was at Dalkania, they offered to prepare a meal for me. 
This I knew would strain the resources of the small community, 
so I asked for a dish of tea, but as there was no tea in the 
village I was given a drink of fresh milk sweetened to excess 
with jaggery, a very satisfying and not unpleasant drink— when 
one gets used to it. At the request of my hosts I mounted guard 
while the remaining portion of the wheat crop was cut; and at 
midday, taking the good wishes of the people with me, I went 
down into the valley in the direction in which the tigers had 
been heard calling. 

The valley, starting from the watershed of the three rivers 
Ladhya, Nandhour and Eastern Goula, runs south-west for 
twenty miles and is densely wooded. Tracking was impossible, 
and my only hope of seeing the tigers was to attract them to 
myself, or helped by the jungle folk to stalk them. 

To those of you who may be inclined to indulge in the sport of 
man-eater hunting on foot, it will be of interest to know that 
the birds and animals of the jungle, and the four winds of 
heaven, play a very important part in this form of sport. This is 
not the place to give the names of the jungle folk on whose 
alarm-calls the sportsman depends, to a great extent, for his 
safety and knowledge of his quarry's movements; for in a 
country in which a walk up or down hill of three or four miles 
might mean a difference in altitude of as many thousand feet 
the variation in fauna, in a well-stocked area, is considerable. 
The wind, however, at all altitudes, remains a constant factor, 
and a few words relevant to its importance in connexion with 
man-eater hunting on foot will not be out of place. 

Tigers do not know that human beings have no sense of smell, 
and when a tiger becomes a man-eater it treats human beings 
exactly as it treats wild animals, that is, it approaches its 
intended victims up-wind, or lies up in wait for them down¬ 
wind. 



The significance of this will be apparent when it is realized 
that, while the sportsman is trying to get a sight of the tiger, 
the tiger in all probability is trying to stalk the sportsman, or is 
lying up in wait for him. The contest, owing to the tiger's 
height, colouring, and ability to move without making a sound, 
would be very unequal were it not for the wind-factor operating 
in favour of the sportsman. 

In all cases where killing is done by stalking or stealth, the 
victim is approached from behind. This being so, it would be 
suicidal for the sportsman to enter dense jungle, in which he 
had every reason to believe a man-eater was lurking, unless he 
was capable of making full use of the currents of air. For 
example, assuming that the sportsman has to proceed, owing to 
the nature of the ground, in the direction from which the wind 
is blowing, the danger would lie behind him, where he would 
be least able to deal with it, but by frequently tacking across 
the wind he could keep the danger alternately to right and left 
of him. In print this scheme may not appear very attractive, but 
in practice it works; and, short of walking backwards, I do not 
know of a better or safer method of going up-wind through 
dense cover in which a hungry man-eater is lurking. 

By evening I had reached the upper end of the valley, without 
having seen the tigers and without having received any 
indication from bird or animal of their presence in the jungle. 
The only habitation then in sight was a cattle-shed, high up on 
the north side of the valley. 

I was careful in the selection of a tree on this second night, and 
was rewarded by an undisturbed night's rest. Not long after 
dark the tigers called, and a few minutes later two shots from a 
muzzle-loader came echoing down the valley, followed by a lot 
of shouting from the graziers at the cattle station. Thereafter 
the night was silent. 

By the afternoon of the following day I had explored every bit 
of the valley, and I was making my way up a grassy slope intent 
on rejoining my men at Dalkania when I heard a long-drawn- 



out cooee from the direction of the cattle-shed. The cooee was 
repeated once and again, and on my sending back an 
answering call I saw a man climb on a projecting rock, and 
from this vantage point he shouted across the valley to ask if I 
was the sahib who had come from Naini Tal to shoot the man- 
eater. On my telling him I was that sahib, he informed me that 
his cattle had stampeded out of a ravine on my side of the 
valley at about midday, and that when he counted them on 
arrival at the cattle station he found that one— a white cow— 
was missing. 

He suspected that the cow had been killed by the tigers he had 
heard calling the previous night, half a mile to the west of 
where I was standing. Thanking him for his information, I set 
off to investigate the ravine. I had gone but a short distance 
along the edge of the ravine when I came on the tracks of the 
stampeding cattle, and following these tracks back I had no 
difficulty in finding the spot where the cow had been killed. 
After killing the cow the tigers had taken it down the steep 
hillside into the ravine. An approach along the drag was not 
advisable, so going down into the valley I made a wide detour, 
and approached the spot where I expected the kill to be from 
the other side of the ravine. This side of the ravine was less 
steep than the side down which the kill had been taken, and 
was deep in young bracken— ideal ground for stalking over. 
Step by step, and as silently as a shadow, I made my way 
through the bracken, which reached above my waist, and when 
I was some thirty yards from the bed of the ravine a movement 
in front of me caught my eye. A white leg was suddenly thrust 
up into the air and violently agitated, and next moment there 
was a deep-throated growl— the tigers were on the kill and 
were having a difference of opinion over some toothful morsel. 

For several minutes I stood perfectly still; the leg continued to 
be agitated, but the growl was not repeated. A nearer approach 
was not advisable, for even if I succeeded in covering the thirty 
yards without being seen, and managed to kill one of the tigers, 
the other, as likely as not, would blunder into me, and the 



ground I was on would give me no chance of defending myself. 
Twenty yards to my left front, and about the same distance 
from the tigers, there was an outcrop of rock, some ten to 
fifteen feet high. If I could reach this rock without being seen, I 
should in all probability get an easy shot at the tigers. 

Dropping on hands and knees, and pushing the rifle before me, 

I crawled through the bracken to the shelter of the rocks, 
paused a minute to regain my breath and make quite sure the 
rifle was loaded, and then climbed the rock. When my eyes 
were level with the top, I looked over, and saw the two tigers. 

One was eating at the hind quarters of the cow, while the other 
was lying near by licking its paws. Both tigers appeared to be 
about the same size, but the one that was licking its paws was 
several shades lighter than the other; and concluding that her 
light colouring was due to age and that she was the old man- 
eater, I aligned the sights very carefully on her, and fired. At my 
shot she reared up and fell backwards, while the other bounded 
down the ravine and was out of sight before I could press the 
second trigger. The tiger I had shot did not move again, and 
after pelting it with stones to make sure it was dead, I 
approached and met with a great disappointment; for a glance 
at close quarters showed me I had made a mistake and shot the 
cub— a mistake that during the ensuing twelve months cost the 
district fifteen lives and incidentally nearly cost me my own 
life. 

Disappointment was to a certain extent mitigated by the 
thought that this young tigress, even if she had not actually 
killed any human beings herself, had probably assisted her old 
mother to kill (this assumption I later found to be correct), and 
in any case, having been nurtured on human flesh, she could— 
to salve my feelings— be classed as a potential man-eater. 

Skinning a tiger with assistance on open ground and with the 
requisite appliances is an easy job, but here the job was 
anything but easy, for I was alone, surrounded by thick cover, 
and my only appliance was a penknife; and though there was 



no actual danger to be apprehended from the man-eater, for 
tigers never kill in excess of their requirements, there was the 
uneasy feeling in the back of my mind that the tigress had 
returned and was watching my every movement. 

The sun was near setting before the arduous task was 
completed, and as I should have to spend yet another night in 
the jungles I decided to remain where I was. The tigress was a 
very old animal, as I could see from her pug marks, and having 
lived all her life in a district in which there are nearly as many 
fire-arms as men to use them, had nothing to learn about men 
and their ways. Even so, there was just a chance that she might 
return to the kill some time during the night, and remain in the 
vicinity until light came in the morning. 

My selection of a tree was of necessity limited, and the one I 
spent that night in proved, by morning, to be the most 
uncomfortable tree I have ever spent twelve hours in. The 
tigress called at intervals throughout the night, and as morning 
drew near the calling became fainter and fainter, and 
eventually died away on the ridge above me. 

Cramped, and stiff, and hungry— I had been without food for 
sixty-four hours— and with my clothes clinging to me— it had 
rained for an hour during the night— I descended from the tree 
when objects were clearly visible, and, after tying the tiger's 
skin up in a coat, set off for Dalkania. 

I have never weighed a tiger's skin when green, and if the skin, 
plus the head and paws, which I carried for fifteen miles that 
day weighed 40 pounds at the start, I would have taken my 
oath it weighed 200 pounds before I reached my destination. 

In a courtyard, flagged with great slabs of blue slate, and 
common to a dozen houses, I found my men in conference with 
a hundred or more villagers. My approach, along a yard-wide 
lane between two houses, had not been observed, and the 
welcome I received when, bedraggled and covered with blood, 

I staggered into the circle of squatting men will live in my 



memory as long as memory lasts. 

My 40-lb. tent had been pitched in a field of stubble a hundred 
yards from the village, and I had hardly reached it before tea 
was laid out for me on a table improvised out of a couple of 
suitcases and planks borrowed from the village. I was told later 
by the villagers that my men, who had been with me for years 
and had accompanied me on several similar expeditions, 
refusing to believe that the man-eater had claimed me as a 
victim, had kept a kettle on the boil night and day in 
anticipation of my return, and, further, had stoutly opposed the 
Headmen of Dalkania and the adjoining villages sending a 
report to Almora and Naini Tal that I was missing. 

A hot bath, taken of necessity in the open and in full view of the 
village— I was too dirty and too tired to care who saw me— 
was followed by an ample dinner, and I was thinking of turning 
in for the night when a flash of lightning succeeded by a loud 
peal of thunder heralded the approach of a storm. Tent-pegs 
are of little use in a field, so long stakes were hurriedly 
procured and securely driven into the ground, and to these 
stakes the tent-ropes were tied. For further safety all the 
available ropes in camp were criss-crossed over the tent and 
lashed to the stakes. The storm of wind and rain lasted an hour 
and was one of the worst the little tent had ever weathered. 
Several of the guy-ropes were torn from the canvas, but the 
stakes and criss-cross ropes held. Most of my things were 
soaked through, and a little stream several inches deep was 
running from end to end of the tent; my bed, however, was 
comparatively dry, and by 10 o'clock my men were safely 
lodged behind locked doors in the house the villagers had 
placed at their disposal, while I, with a loaded rifle for 
company, settled down to a sleep which lasted for twelve hours. 

The following day was occupied in drying my kit and in 
cleaning and pegging out the tiger's skin. While these 
operations were in progress the villagers, who had taken a 
holiday from their field work, crowded round to hear my 



experiences and to tell me theirs. Every man present had lost 
one or more relatives, and several bore tooth and claw marks, 
inflicted by the man-eater, which they will carry to their graves. 
My regret at having lost an opportunity of killing the man-eater 
was not endorsed by the assembled men. True, there had 
originally been only one man-eater; but, of recent months, 
rescue parties who had gone out to recover the remains of 
human victims had found two tigers on the kills, and only a 
fortnight previously a man and his wife had been killed 
simultaneously, which was proof sufficient for them that both 
tigers were established man-eaters. 

My tent was on a spur of the hill, and commanded an extensive 
view. Immediately below me was the valley of the Nandhour 
river, with a hill, devoid of any cultivation, rising to a height of 
9,000 feet on the far side. As I sat on the edge of the terraced 
fields that evening with a pair of good binoculars in my hand 
and the Government map spread out beside me, the villagers 
pointed out the exact positions where twenty human beings 
had been killed during the past three years. These kills were 
more or less evenly distributed over an area of forty square 
miles. 

The forests in this area were open to grazing, and on the cattle- 
paths leading to them I decided to tie up my four young 
buffaloes. 

During the following ten days no news was received of the 
tigress, and I spent the time in visiting the buffaloes in the 
morning, searching the forests in the day, and tying out the 
buffaloes in the evening. On the eleventh day my hopes were 
raised by the report that a cow had been killed on a ravine on 
the hill above my tent. A visit to the kill, however, satisfied me 
the cow had been killed by an old leopard, whose pug marks I 
had repeatedly seen. The villagers complained that the leopard 
had for several years been taking heavy toll of their cattle and 
goats, so I decided to sit up for him. A shallow cave close to the 
dead cow gave me the cover I needed. I had not been long in 



the cave when I caught sight of the leopard coming down the 
opposite side of the ravine, and I was raising my rifle for a shot 
when I heard a very agitated voice from the direction of the 
village calling to me. 

There could be but one reason for this urgent call, and 
grabbing up my hat I dashed out of the cave, much to the 
consternation of the leopard, who first flattened himself out on 
the ground, and then with an angry woof went bounding back 
the way he had come, while I scrambled up my side of the 
ravine; and, arriving at the top, shouted to the man that I was 
coming, and set off at top speed to join him. 

The man had run all the way uphill from the village, and when 
he regained his breath he informed me that a woman had just 
been killed by the man-eater, about half a mile on the far side 
of the village. As we ran down the hillside I saw a crowd of 
people collected in the courtyard already alluded to. Once 
again my approach through the narrow lane was not observed, 
and looking over the heads of the assembled men, I saw a girl 
sitting on the ground. 

The upper part of her clothing had been torn off her young 
body, and with head thrown back and hands resting on the 
ground behind to support her, she sat without sound or 
movement, other than the heaving up and down of her breast, 
in the hollow of which the blood, that was flowing down her 
face and neck, was collecting in a sticky congealed mass. 

My presence was soon detected and a way made for me to 
approach the girl. While I was examining her wounds, a score 
of people, all talking at the same time, informed me that the 
attack on the girl had been made on comparatively open 
ground in full view of a number of people including the girl's 
husband; that alarmed at their combined shouts the tiger had 
left the girl and gone off in the direction of the forest; that 
leaving the girl for dead where she had fallen her companions 
had run back to the village to inform me; that subsequently the 
girl had regained consciousness and returned to the village; 



that she would without doubt die of her injuries in a few 
minutes; and that they would then carry her back to the scene 
of the attack, and I could sit up over the corpse and shoot the 
tiger. 

While this information was being imparted to me the girl's eyes 
never left my face and followed my every movement with the 
liquid pleading gaze of a wounded and frightened animal. 

Room to move unhampered, quiet to collect my wits, and clean 
air for the girl to breathe were necessary, and I am afraid the 
methods I employed to gain them were not as gentle as they 
might have been. When the last of the men had left in a hurry, I 
set the women, who up to now had remained in the 
background, to warming water and to tearing my shirt, which 
was comparatively clean and dry, into bandages, while one girl, 
who appeared to be on the point of getting hysterics, was 
bundled off to scour the village for a pair of scissors. The water 
and bandages were ready before the girl I had sent for the 
scissors returned with the only pair, she said, the village could 
produce. They had been found in the house of a tailor, long 
since dead, and had been used by the widow for digging up 
potatoes. The rusty blades, some eight inches long, could not 
be made to meet at any point, and after a vain attempt I 
decided to leave the thick coils of blood-caked hair alone. 

The major wounds consisted of two claw cuts, one starting 
between the eyes and extending right over the head and down 
to the nape of the neck, leaving the scalp hanging in two 
halves, and the other, starting near the first, running across the 
forehead up to the right ear. In addition to these ugly gaping 
wounds there were a number of deep scratches on the right 
breast, right shoulder and neck, and one deep cut on the back 
of the right hand, evidently inflicted when the girl had put up 
her hand in a vain attempt to shield her head. 

A doctor friend whom I had once taken out tiger-shooting on 
foot had, on our return after an exciting morning, presented me 
with a two-ounce bottle of yellow fluid which he advised me to 



carry whenever I went out shooting. I had carried the bottle in 
the inner pocket of my shooting jacket for over a year and a 
portion of the fluid had evaporated; but the bottle was still 
three-parts full, and after I had washed the girl's head and 
body I knocked the neck off the bottle and poured the contents, 
to the last drop, into the wounds. This done I bandaged the 
head, to try to keep the scalp in position, and then picked up 
the girl and carried her to her home— a single room combining 
living quarters, kitchen and nursery— with the women 
following behind. 

Dependent from a rafter near the door was an open basket, the 
occupant of which was now clamouring to be fed. This was a 
complication with which I could not deal, so I left the solution 
of it to the assembled women. Ten days later, when on the eve 
of my departure I visited the girl for the last time, I found her 
sitting on the doorstep of her home with the baby asleep in her 
lap. 

Her wounds, except for a sore at the nape of her neck where 
the tiger's claws had sunk deepest into the flesh, were all 
healed, and when parting her great wealth of raven-black hair 
to show me where the scalp had made a perfect join, she said, 
with a smile, that she was very glad her young sister had— 
quite by mistake— borrowed the wrong pair of scissors from 
the tailor's widow (for a shorn head here is the sign of 
widowhood). If these lines should ever be read by my friend the 
doctor I should like him to know that the little bottle of yellow 
fluid he so thoughtfully provided for me, saved the life of a very 
brave young mother. 

While I had been attending to the girl my men had procured a 
goat. Following back the blood trail made by the girl I found 
the spot where the attack had taken place, and tying the goat 
to a bush I climbed into a stunted oak, the only tree in the 
vicinity, and prepared for an all-night vigil. Sleep, even in 
snatches, was not possible, for my seat was only a few feet 
from the ground, and the tigress was still without her dinner. 



However, I neither saw nor heard anything throughout the 
night. 

On examining the ground in the morning— I had not had time 
to do this the previous evening— I found that the tigress, after 
attacking the girl, had gone up the valley for half a mile to 
where a cattle track crossed the Nandhour river. This track it 
had followed for two miles, to its junction with the forest road 
on the ridge above Dalkania. Here on the hard ground I lost the 
tracks. 

For two days the people in all the surrounding villages kept as 
close to their habitations as the want of sanitary conveniences 
permitted, and then on the third day news was brought to me 
by four runners that the man-eater had claimed a victim at 
Lohali, a village five miles to the south of Dalkania. The 
runners stated that the distance by the forest road was ten 
miles, but only five by a short cut by which they proposed 
taking me back. My preparations were soon made, and a little 
after midday I set off with my four guides. 

A very stiff climb of two miles brought us to the crest of the 
long ridge south of Dalkania and in view of the valley three 
miles below, where the 'kill' was reported to have taken place. 
My guides could give me no particulars. They lived in a small 
village a mile on the near side of Lohali, and at 10 a.m. a 
message had come to them— in the manner already described 
— that a woman of Lohali had been killed by the man-eater, and 
they were instructed to convey this information to me at 
Dalkania. 

The top of the hill on which we were standing was bare of 
trees, and, while I regained my breath and had a smoke, my 
companions pointed out the landmarks. Close to where we 
were resting, and under the shelter of a great rock, there was a 
small ruined hut, with a circular thorn enclosure near by. 
Questioned about this hut, the men told me the following story. 
Four years previously a Bhutia (a man from across the border), 
who had all the winter been sending packages of gur, salt, and 



other commodities from the bazaars at the foothills into the 
interior of the district, had built the hut with the object of 
resting and fattening his flock of goats through the summer 
and rains, and getting them fit for the next winter's work. After 
a few weeks the goats wandered down the hill and damaged 
my informants' crops, and when they came up to lodge a 
protest, they found the hut empty, and the fierce sheepdog 
these men invariably keep with them, to guard their camps at 
night, chained to an iron stake and dead. Foul play was 
suspected, and next day men were collected from adjoining 
villages and a search organized. Pointing to an oak tree scored 
by lightning and distant some four hundred yards, my 
informants said that under it the remains of the man— his skull 
and a few splinters of bone— and his clothes had been found. 
This was the Chowgarh man-eater's first human victim. 

There was no way of descending the precipitous hill from 
where we were sitting, and the men informed me we should 
have to proceed half a mile along the ridge to where we should 
find a very steep and rough track which would take us straight 
down, past their village, to Lohali, which we could see in the 
valley below. We had covered about half the distance we had to 
go along the ridge, when all at once, and without being able to 
ascribe any reason for it, I felt we were being followed. Arguing 
with myself against this feeling was of no avail; there was only 
one man-eater in all this area and she had procured a kill three 
miles away which she was not likely to leave. However, the 
uneasy feeling persisted, and as we were now at the widest 
part of the grassy ridge I made the men sit down, instructing 
them not to move until I returned, and myself set out on a tour 
of investigation. Retracing my steps to where we had first come 
out on the ridge I entered the jungle, and carefully worked 
round the open ground and back to where the men were 
sitting. No alarm-call of animal or bird indicated that a tiger 
was anywhere in the vicinity, but from there on I made the four 
men walk in front of me, while I brought up the rear, with 
thumb on safety-catch and a constant lookout behind. 



When we arrived at the little village my companions had 
started from, they asked for permission to leave me. I was very 
glad of this request, for I had a mile of dense scrub jungle to go 
through, and though the feeling that I was being followed had 
long since left me, I felt safer and more comfortable with only 
my own life to guard. A little below the outlying terraced fields, 
and where the dense scrub started, there was a crystal-clear 
spring of water, from which the village drew its water-supply. 
Here in the soft wet ground I found the fresh pug marks of the 
man-eater. 

These pug marks, coming from the direction of the village I was 
making for, coupled with the uneasy feeling I had experienced 
on the ridge above, convinced me that something had gone 
wrong with the 'kill' and that my quest would be fruitless. As I 
emerged from the scrub jungle I came in view of Lohali, which 
consisted of five or six small houses. Near the door of one of 
these houses a group of people were collected. 

My approach over the steep open ground and narrow terraced 
fields was observed, and a few men detached themselves from 
the group near the door and advanced to meet me. One of the 
number, an old man, bent down to touch my feet, and with 
tears streaming down his cheeks implored me to save the life of 
his daughter. His story was as short as it was tragic. His 
daughter, who was a widow and the only relative he had in the 
world, had gone out at about ten o'clock to collect dry sticks 
with which to cook their midday meal. A small stream flows 
through the valley, and on the far side of the stream from the 
village the hill goes steeply up. On the lower slope of this hill 
there are a few terraced fields. At the edge of the lowest field, 
and distant about 150 yards from the home, the woman had 
started to collect sticks. A little later, some women who were 
washing their clothes in the stream heard a scream, and on 
looking up saw the woman and a tiger disappearing together 
into the dense thorn bushes, which extended from the edge of 
the field right down to the stream. Dashing back to the village, 
the women raised an alarm. The frightened villagers made no 



attempt at a rescue, and a message for help was shouted to a 
village higher up the valley, from where it was tossed back to 
the village from which the four men had set out to find me. Half 
an hour after the message had been sent, the wounded woman 
crawled home. Her story was that she had seen the tiger just as 
it was about to spring on her, and as there was no time to run, 
she had jumped down the almost perpendicular hillside and 
while she was in the air the tiger had caught her and they had 
gone down the hill together. She remembered nothing further 
until she regained consciousness and found herself near the 
stream; and being unable to call for help, she had crawled back 
to the village on her hands and knees. 

We had reached the door of the house while this tale was being 
told. Making the people stand back from the door— the only 
opening in the four walls of the room— I drew the blood¬ 
stained sheet off the woman, whose pitiful condition I am not 
going to attempt to describe. Had I been a qualified doctor, 
armed with modern appliances, instead of just a mere man with 
a little permanganate of potash in his pocket, I do not think it 
would have been possible to have saved the woman's life; for 
the deep tooth and claw wounds in her face, neck, and other 
parts of her body had, in that hot unventilated room, already 
turned septic. Mercifully she was only semi-conscious. The old 
father had followed me into the room, and, more for his 
satisfaction than for any good I thought it would do, I washed 
the caked blood from the woman's head and body, and cleaned 
out the wounds as best I could with my handkerchief and a 
strong solution of permanganate. 

It was now too late to think of returning to my camp, and a 
place would have to be found in which to pass the night. A little 
way up the stream, and not far from where the women had 
been washing their clothes, there was a giant pipal tree, with a 
foot-high masonry platform round it used by the villagers for 
religious ceremonies. 

I undressed on the platform and bathed in the stream; and 



when the wind had carried out the functions of a towel, dressed 
again, put my back to the tree and, laying the loaded rifle by 
my side, prepared to see the night out. Admittedly it was an 
unsuitable place in which to spend the night, but any place was 
preferable to the village, and that dark room, with its hot fetid 
atmosphere and swarm of buzzing flies, where a woman in 
torment fought desperately for breath. 

During the night the wailing of women announced that the 
sufferer's troubles were over, and when I passed through the 
village at day break preparations for the funeral were well 
advanced. 

From the experience of this unfortunate woman, and that of the 
girl at Dalkania, it was now evident that the old tigress had 
depended, to a very great extent, on her cub to kill the human 
beings she attacked. Usually only one out of every hundred 
people attacked by man-eating tigers escapes, but in the case 
of this man-eater it was apparent that more people would be 
mauled than killed outright, and as the nearest hospital was 
fifty miles away, when I returned to Naini Tal I appealed to 
Government to send a supply of disinfectants and dressings to 
all the Headmen of villages in the area in which the man-eater 
was operating. On my subsequent visit I was glad to learn that 
the request had been complied with, and that the disinfectants 
had saved the lives of a number of people. 

I stayed at Dalkania for another week and announced on a 
Saturday that I would leave for home the following Monday. I 
had now been in the man-eater's domain for close on a month, 
and the constant strain of sleeping in- an open tent, and of 
walking endless miles during the day with the prospect of every 
step being the last, was beginning to tell on my nerves. The 
villagers received my announcement with consternation, and 
only desisted from trying to make me change my decision when 
I promised them I would return at the first opportunity. 

After breakfast on Sunday morning the Headmen of Dalkania 
paid me a visit and requested me to shoot them some game 



before I left. The request was gladly acceded to, and half an 
hour later, accompanied by four villagers and one of my own 
men, and armed with a *275 rifle and a clip of cartridges, I set 
off for the hill on the far side of the Nandhour river, on the 
upper slopes of which I had, from my camp, frequently seen 
ghooral feeding. 

One of the villagers accompanying me was a tall gaunt man 
with a terribly disfigured face. He had been a constant visitor 
to my camp, and finding in me a good listener had told and 
retold his encounter with the man-eater so often that I could, 
without effort, repeat the whole story in my sleep. The 
encounter had taken place four years previously and is best 
told in his own words. 

'Do you see that pine tree, sahib, at the bottom of the grassy 
slope on the shoulder of the hill? Yes, the pine tree with a big 
white rock to the east of it. Well, it was at the upper edge of the 
grassy slope that the man-eater attacked me. The grassy slope 
is as perpendicular as the wall of a house, and none but a 
hillman could find foothold on it. My son, who was eight years 
of age at the time, and I had cut grass on that slope on the day 
of my misfortune, carrying the grass up in armfuls to the belt of 
trees where the ground is level. 

'I was stooping down at the very edge of the slope, tying the 
grass into a big bundle, when the tiger sprang at me and 
buried its teeth, one under my right eye, one in my chin and 
the other two here at the back of my neck. The tiger's mouth 
struck me with a great blow and I fell over on my back, while 
the tiger lay on top of me chest to chest, with its stomach 
between my legs. When falling backwards I had flung out my 
arms and my right hand had come in contact with an oak 
sapling. As my fingers grasped the sapling, an idea came to me. 
My legs were free, and if I could draw them up and insert my 
feet under and against the tiger's belly, I might be able to push 
the tiger off, and run away. The pain, as the tiger crushed all 
the bones on the right side of my face, was terrible; but I did 



not lose consciousness, for you see, sahib, at that time I was a 
young man, and in all the hills there was no one to compare 
with me in strength. Very slowly, so as not to anger the tiger I 
drew my legs up on either side of it, and gently inserted my 
bare feet against its belly Then placing my left hand against its 
chest and pushing and kicking upwards with all my might, I 
lifted the tiger right off the ground and, we being on the very 
edge of the perpendicular hillside, the tiger went crashing 
down and belike would have taken me with him, had my hold 
on the sapling not been a good one. 

'My son had been too frightened to run away, and when the 
tiger had gone, I took his loincloth from him and wrapped it 
round my head, and holding his hand I walked back to the 
village. Arrived at my home I told my wife to call all my friends 
together, for I wished to see their faces before I died. When my 
friends were assembled and saw my condition, they wanted to 
put me on a charpoy and carry me fifty miles to the Almora 
hospital, but this I would not consent to; for my suffering was 
great, and being assured that my time had come, I wanted to 
die where I had been born, and where I had lived all my life. 
Water was brought, for I was thirsty and my head was on fire, 
but when it was poured into my mouth, it all flowed out 
through the holes in my neck. Thereafter, for a period beyond 
measure, there was great confusion in my mind, and much pain 
in my head and in my neck, and while I waited and longed for 
death to end my sufferings my wounds healed of themselves, 
and I became well. 

'And now, sahib, I am as you see me, old and thin, and with 
white hair, and a face that no man can look on without 
repulsion. My enemy lives and continues to claim victims but 
do not be deceived into thinking it is a tiger, for it is no tiger 
but an evil spirit, who, when it craves for human flesh and 
blood, takes on for a little while the semblance of a tiger. But 
they say you are a sadhu, sahib, and the spirits that guard 
sadhus are more powerful than this evil spirit, as is proved by 
the fact that you spent three days and three nights alone in the 



jungle, and came out— as your men said you would— alive and 
unhurt.' 

Looking at the great frame of the man, it was easy to picture 
him as having been a veritable giant. And a giant in strength he 
must have been, for no man, unless he had been endowed with 
strength far above the average, could have lifted the tigress 
into the air, torn its hold from the side of his head, carrying 
away, as it did, half his face with it, and hurled it down the 
precipitous hill. 

My gaunt friend constituted himself our guide, and with a 
beautifully polished axe, with long tapering handle, over his 
shoulder, led us by devious steep paths to the valley below. 
Fording the Nandhour river, we crossed several wide terraced 
fields, now gone out of cultivation for fear of the man-eater, and 
on reaching the foot of the hill started what proved to be a very 
stiff climb, through forest, to the grass slopes above. Gaunt my 
friend may have been, but he lacked nothing in wind, and tough 
as I was it was only by calling frequent halts— to admire the 
view— that I was able to keep up with him. 

Emerging from the tree forest, we went diagonally across the 
grassy slope, in the direction of a rock cliff that extended 
upwards for a thousand feet or more. It was on this cliff, 
sprinkled over with tufts of short grass, that I had seen ghooral 
feeding from my tent. We had covered a few hundred yards 
when one of these small mountain-goats started up out of a 
ravine, and at my shot 'crumpled up and slipped back out of 
sight. Alarmed by the report of the rifle, another ghooral, that 
had evidently been lying asleep at the foot of the cliff, sprang to 
his feet and went up the rock face, as only he or his big brother 
the tahr could have done. As he climbed upwards, I lay down 
and, putting the sight to 200 yards, waited for him to stop. This 
he presently did, coming out on a projecting rock to look down 
on us. At my shot he staggered, regained his footing, and very 
slowly continued his climb. At the second shot he fell, hung for 
a second or two on a narrow ledge, and then fell through space 



to the grassy slope from whence he had started. Striking the 
ground he rolled over and over, passing within a hundred yards 
of us, and eventually came to rest on a cattle track a hundred 
and fifty yards below. 

I have only once, in all the years I have been shooting, 
witnessed a similar sight to the one we saw during the next few 
minutes, and on that occasion the marauder was a leopard. 

The ghooral had hardly come to rest when a big Himalayan 
bear came lumbering out of a ravine on the side of the grassy 
slope and, with never a pause or backward look, came at a fast 
trot along the cattle track. On reaching the dead goat he sat 
down and took it into his lap, and as he started nosing the goat, 
I fired. Maybe I hurried over my shot, or allowed too much for 
refraction; anyway the bullet went low and struck the bear in 
the stomach instead of in the chest. To the six of us who were 
intently watching, it appeared that the bear took the smack of 
the bullet as an assault from the ghooral, for, rearing up, he 
flung the animal from him and came galloping along the track, 
emitting angry grunts. As he passed a hundred yards below us I 
fired my fifth and last cartridge, the bullet, as I found later, 
going through the fleshy part of his hind quarters. 

While the men retrieved the two ghooral, I descended to 
examine the blood trail. The blood on the track showed the 
bear to be hard hit, but even so there was danger in following 
it up with an empty rifle, for bears are bad-tempered at the 
best of times, and are very ugly customers to deal with when 
wounded. 

When the men rejoined me a short council of war was held. 
Camp was three and a half miles away, and as it was now 2 
p.m. it would not be possible to fetch more ammunition, track 
down and kill the bear, and get back home by dark; so it was 
unanimously decided that we should follow up the wounded 
animal and try to finish it off with stones and the axe. 

The hill was steep and fairly free of undergrowth, and by 



keeping above the bear there was a sporting chance of our 
being able to accomplish our task without serious mishap. We 
accordingly set off, I leading the way followed by three men, 
the rear being brought up by two men each with a ghooral 
strapped to his back. Arrived at the spot where I had fired my 
last shot, additional blood on the track greatly encouraged us. 
Two hundred yards further on, the blood trail led down into a 
deep ravine. Here we divided up our force, two men crossing to 
the far side, the owner of the axe and I remaining on the near 
side, with the men carrying the ghooral following in our rear. 

On the word being given we started to advance down the hill. 

In the bed of the ravine, and fifty feet below us, was a dense 
patch of stunted bamboo, and when a stone was thrown into 
this thicket, the bear got up with a scream of rage; and six 
men, putting their best foot foremost, went straight up the hill. 

I was not trained to this form of exercise, and on looking back 
to see if the bear was gaining on us, I saw, much to my relief, 
that he was going as hard downhill as we were going uphill. A 
shout to my companions, a rapid change of direction, and we 
were off in full cry and rapidly gaining on our quarry. A few 
well-aimed shots had been registered, followed by delighted 
shouts from the marksmen, and angry grunts from the bear, 
when at a sharp bend in the ravine, which necessitated a 
cautious advance, we lost touch with the bear. To have followed 
the blood trail would have been easy, but here the ravine was 
full of big rocks, behind any of which the bear might have been 
lurking, so while the encumbered men sat down for a rest, a 
cast was made on either side of the ravine. While my 
companion went forward to look down into the ravine, I went to 
the right to prospect a rocky cliff that went sheer down for 
some two hundred feet. Holding to a tree for support, I leaned 
over and saw the bear lying on a narrow ledge forty feet 
immediately below me. I picked up a stone, about thirty pounds 
in weight, and, again advancing to the edge and in imminent 
danger of going over myself, I raised the stone above my head 
with both hands and hurled it. 



The stone struck the ledge a few inches from the bear's head, 
and scrambling to his feet he disappeared from sight, to 
reappear a minute later on the side of the hill. Once again the 
hunt was on. The ground was here more open and less 
encumbered with rocks, and the four of us who were running 
light had no difficulty in keeping up with him. For a mile or 
more we ran him at top speed, until we eventually cleared the 
forest and emerged on to the terraced fields. Rainwater had 
cut several deep and narrow channels across the fields, and in 
one of these channels the bear took cover. 

The man with the distorted face was the only armed member of 
the party and he was unanimously elected executioner. Nothing 
loth, he cautiously approached the bear and, swinging his 
beautifully polished axe aloft, brought the square head down on 
the bear's skull. The result was as alarming as it was 
unexpected. The axe-head rebounded off the bear's skull as 
though it had been struck on a block of rubber, and with a 
scream of rage the animal reared up on his hind legs. 
Fortunately he did not follow up his advantage, for we were 
bunched together, and in trying to run got in each other's way. 

The bear did not appear to like this open ground, and after 
going a short way down the channel again took cover. It was 
now my turn for the axe. The bear,, however, having once been 
struck resented my approach, and it was only after a great deal 
of manoeuvring that I eventually got within striking distance. It 
had been my ambition when a boy to be a lumberman in 
Canada, and I had attained sufficient proficiency with an axe to 
split a match-stick. I had no fear, therefore, as the owner had, 
of the axe glancing off and getting damaged on the stones, and 
the moment I got within reach I buried the entire blade in the 
bear's skull. 

Himalayan bearskins are very greatly prized by our hill folk, 
and the owner of the axe was a very proud and envied man 
when I told him he could have the skin in addition to a double 
share of the ghooral meat. Leaving the men, whose numbers 



were being rapidly augmented by new arrivals from the village, 
to skin and divide up the bag, I climbed up to the village and 
paid, as already related, a last visit to the injured girl. The day 
had been a strenuous one, and if the man-eater had paid me a 
visit that night she would have 'caught me napping'. 

On the road I had taken when coming to Dalkania therewere 
several long stiff climbs up treeless hills, and when I mentioned 
the discomforts of this road to the villagers they had suggested 
that I should go back via Haira Khan. This route would 
necessitate only one climb to the ridge above the village, from 
where it was downhill all the way to Ranibagh, whence I could 
complete the journey to Naini Tal by car. 

I had warned my men overnight to prepare for an early start, 
and a little before sunrise, leaving them to pack up and follow 
me, I said good-bye to my friends at Dalkania and started on 
the two-mile climb to the forest road on the ridge above. The 
footpath I took was not the one by which my men, and later I, 
had arrived at Dalkania, but was one the villagers used when 
going to, and returning from, the bazaars in the foot-hills. 

The path wound in and out of deep ravines, through thick oak 
and pine forests and dense undergrowth. There had been no 
news of the tigress for a week. This absence of news made me 
all the more careful, and an hour after leaving camp I arrived 
without mishap at an open glade near the top of the hill, within 
a hundred yards of the forest road. 

The glade was pear-shaped, roughly a hundred yards long and 
fifty yards wide, with a stagnant pool of rain-water in the 
centre of it. Sambur and other game used this pool as a 
drinking place and wallow and, curious to see the tracks round 
it, I left the path, which skirted the left-hand side of the glade 
and passed close under a cliff of rock which extended up to the 
road. As 'I approached the pool I saw the pug marks of the 
tigress in the soft earth at the edge of the water. She had 
approached the pool from the same direction as I had, and, 
evidently disturbed by me, had crossed the water and gone into 



the dense tree and scrub jungle on the right-hand side of the 
glade. A great chance lost, for had I kept as careful a lookout in 
front as I had behind I should have seen her before she saw 
me. However, though I had missed a chance, the advantages 
were now all on my side and distinctly in my favour. 

The tigress had seen me, or she would not have crossed the 
pool and hurried for shelter, as her tracks showed she had 
done. Having seen me she had also seen that I was alone, and 
watching me from cover as she undoubtedly was, she would 
assume I was going to the pool to drink as she had done. My 
movements up to this had been quite natural, and if I could 
continue to make her think I was unaware of her presence, she 
would possibly give me a second chance. Stooping down and 
keeping a very sharp lookout from under my hat, I coughed 
several times, splashed the water about, and then, moving very 
slowly and gathering dry sticks on the way, I went to the foot of 
the steep rock. Here I built a small fire, and putting my back to 
the rock lit a cigarette. By the time the cigarette had been 
smoked the fire had burnt out. I then lay down, and pillowing 
my head on my left arm placed the rifle on the ground with rny 
finger on the trigger. 

The rock above me was too steep for any animal to find 
foothold on. I had therefore only my front to guard, and as the 
heavy cover nowhere approached to within less than twenty 
yards of my position I was quite safe. I had all this time neither 
seen nor heard anything; nevertheless, I was convinced that 
the tigress was watching me. The rim of my hat, while 
effectually shading my eyes, did not obstruct my vision and 
inch by inch I scanned every bit of the jungle within my range 
of view. There was not a breath of wind blowing, and not a leaf 
or blade of grass stirred. My men, whom I had instructed to 
keep close together and sing from the time they left camp until 
they joined me on the forest road, were not due for an hour and 
a half, and during this time it was more than likely that the 
tigress would break cover and try to stalk, or rush, me. 



There are occasions when time drags, and others when it flies. 
My left arm, on which my head was pillowed, had long since 
ceased to prick and had gone dead, but even so the singing of 
the men in the valley below reached me all too soon. The voices 
grew louder, and presently I caught sight of the men as they 
rounded a sharp bend. It was possibly at this bend that the 
tigress had seen me as she turned round to retrace her steps 
after having her drink. Another failure, and the last chance on 
this trip gone. 

After my men had rested we climbed up to the road, and set off 
on what proved to be a very long twenty-mile march to the 
forest Rest House at Haira Khan. After going a couple of 
hundred yards over open ground, the road entered very thick 
forest, and here I made the men walk in front while I brought 
up the rear. We had gone about two miles in this order, when 
on turning a corner I saw a man sitting on the road, herding 
buffaloes. It was now time to call a halt for breakfast, so I 
asked the man where we could get water. He pointed down the 
hill straight in front of him, and said there was a spring down 
there from which his village, which was just round the shoulder 
of the hill, drew its water-supply. There was, however, no 
necessity for us to go down the hill for water, for if we 
continued a little further we should find a good spring on the 
road. 

His village was at the upper end of the valley in which the 
woman of Lohali had been killed the previous week, and he told 
me that nothing had been heard of the man-eater since, and 
added that the animal was possibly now at the other end of the 
district. I disabused his mind on this point by telling him about 
the fresh pug marks I had seen at the pool, and advised him 
very strongly to collect his buffaloes and return to the village. 
His buffaloes, some ten in number, were straggling up towards 
the road and he said he would leave as soon as they had grazed 
up to where he was sitting. Handing him a cigarette, I left him 
with a final warning. What occurred after I left was related to 
me by the men of the village, when I paid the district a second 



visit some months later. 

When the man eventually got home that day he told the 
assembled villagers of our meeting, and my warning, and said 
that after he had watched me go round a bend in the road a 
hundred yards away he started to light the cigarette I had 
given him. A wind was blowing, and to protect the flame of the 
match he bent forward, and while in this position he was seized 
from behind by the right shoulder and pulled backwards. His 
first thought was of the party who had just left him, but 
unfortunately, his cry for help was not heard by them. Help, 
however, was near at hand, for as soon as the buffaloes heard 
his cry, mingled with the growl of the tigress, they charged on 
to the road and drove the tigress off. His shoulder and arm 
were broken, and with great difficulty he managed to climb on 
the back of one of his brave rescuers, and, followed by the rest 
of the herd, reached his home. The villagers tied up his wounds 
as best they could and carried him thirty miles, non-stop, to the 
Haldwani hospital, where he died shortly after admission. 

When Atropos who snips the threads of life misses one thread 
she cuts another, and we who do not know why one thread is 
missed and another cut, call it Fate, Kismet, or what we will. 

For a month I had lived in an open tent, a hundred yards from 
the nearest human being, and from dawn to dusk had 
wandered through the jungles, and on several occasions had 
disguised myself as a woman and cut grass in places where no 
local inhabitant dared to go. During this period the man-eater 
had, quite possibly, missed many opportunities of adding me to 
her bag and now, when making a final effort, she had quite by 
chance encountered this unfortunate man and claimed him as a 
victim. 

II 

The following February I returned to Dalkania. A number of 
human beings had been killed, and many more wounded, over a 
wide area since my departure from the district the previous 
summer, and as the whereabouts of the tigress was not known 


and the chances in one place were as good as in another, I 
decided to return and camp on the ground with which I was 
now familiar. 

On my arrival at Dalkania I was told that a cow had been killed 
the previous evening, on the hill on which the bear hunt had 
taken place. The men who had been herding the cattle at the 
time were positive that the animal they had seen killing the 
cow was a tiger. The kill was lying near some bushes at the 
edge of a deserted field, and was clearly visible from the spot 
where my tent was being put up. Vultures were circling over 
the kill, and looking through my field-glasses I saw several of 
these birds perched on a tree, to the left of the kill. From the 
fact that the kill was lying out in the open, and the vultures had 
not descended on it, I concluded (a) that the cow had been 
killed by a leopard, and (b) that the leopard was lying up close 
to the kill. 

The ground below the field on which the cow was lying was 
very steep and overgrown with dense brushwood. The 
maneater was still at large, and an approach over this ground 
was therefore inadvisable. 

To the right was a grassy slope, but the ground here was too 
open to admit of my approaching the kill without being seen. A 
deep .heavily-wooded ravine, starting from near the crest of the 
hill, ran right down to the Nandhour river, passing within a 
short distance of the kill. The tree on which the vultures were 
perched was growing on the edge of this ravine. I decided on 
this ravine as my line of approach. While I had been planning 
out the stalk with the assistance of the villagers, who knew 
every foot of the ground, my men had prepared tea for me. The 
day was now on the decline but by going hard I should just 
have time to visit the kill and return to camp before nightfall. 

Before setting off I instructed my men to be on the look-out. If, 
after hearing a shot, they saw me on the open ground near the 
kill, three or four of them were immediately to leave camp, and, 
keeping to the open ground, to join me. On the other hand if I 



did not fire, and failed to return by morning, a search party was 
to be organized. 

The ravine was overgrown with raspberry bushes and strewn 
with great rocks, and as the wind was blowing downhill, my 
progress was slow. After a stiff climb I eventually reached the 
tree on which the vultures were perched, only to find that the 
kill was not visible from this spot. The deserted field, which 
through my field-glasses had appeared to be quite straight, I 
found to be crescent-shaped, ten yards across at its widest part 
and tapering to a point at both ends. The outer edge was 
bordered with dense undergrowth, and the hill fell steeply 
away from the inner edge. Only two-thirds of the field was 
visible from where I was standing, and in order to see the 
remaining one-third, on which the kill was lying, it would be 
necessary either to make a wide detour and approach from the 
far side or climb the tree on which the vultures were perched. 

I decided on the latter course. The cow, as far as I could judge, 
was about twenty yards from the tree, and it was quite possible 
that the animal that had killed her was even less than that 
distance from me. To climb the tree without disturbing the 
killer would have been an impossible feat, and would not have 
been attempted had it not been for the vultures. There were by 
now some twenty of these birds on the tree and their number 
was being added to by new arrivals, and as the accommodation 
on the upper branches was limited there was much flapping of 
wings and quarrelling. The tree was leaning outwards away 
from the hill, and about ten feet from the ground a great limb 
projected out over the steep hillside. Hampered with the rifle I 
had great difficulty in reaching this limb. Waiting until a fresh 
quarrel had broken out among the vultures, I stepped out along 
the branch— a difficult balancing feat where a slip or false step 
would have resulted in a fall of a hundred or more feet on to 
the rocks below— reached a fork, and sat down. 

The kill, from which only a few pounds of flesh had been eaten, 
was now in full view. I had been in position about ten minutes. 



and was finding my perch none too comfortable, when two 
vultures, who had been circling round and were uncertain of 
their reception on the tree, alighted on the field a short 
distance from the cow. They had hardly come to rest when they 
were on the wing again, and at the same moment the bushes on 
my side of the kill were gently agitated and out into the open 
stepped a fine male leopard. 

Those who have never seen a leopard under favourable 
conditions in his natural surroundings can have no conception 
of the grace of movement, and beauty of colouring, of this the 
most graceful and the most beautiful of all animals in our 
Indian jungles. Nor are his attractions limited to outward 
appearances, for, pound for pound, his strength is second to 
none, and in courage he lacks nothing. To class such an animal 
as VERMIN, as is done in some parts of India, is a crime which 
only those could perpetrate whose knowledge of the leopard is 
limited to the miserable, underfed, and mangy specimens seen 
in captivity. 

But beautiful as the specimen was that stood before me, his life 
was forfeit, for he had taken to cattle killing, and I had 
promised the people of Dalkania and other villages on my last 
visit that I would rid them of this their minor enemy, if 
opportunity offered. The opportunity had now come, and I do 
not think the leopard heard the shot that killed him. 

Of the many incomprehensible things one meets with in life, 
the hardest to assign any reason for is the way in which 
misfortune dogs an individual, or a family. Take as an example 
the case of the owner of the cow over which I had shot the 
leopard. He was a boy, eight years of age, and an only child. 

Two years previously his mother, while out cutting grass for the 
cow, had been killed and eaten by the man-eater, and twelve 
months later his father had suffered a like fate. The few pots 
and pans the family possessed had been sold to pay off the 
small debt left by the father, and the son started life as the 
owner of one cow; and this particular cow the leopard had 



selected, out of a herd of two or three hundred head of village 
cattle, and killed. (I am afraid my attempt to repair a 
heartbreak was not very successful in this case, for though the 
new cow, a red one, was an animal of parts, it did not make up 
to the boy for the loss of his lifelong white companion.) 

My young buffaloes had been well cared for by the man in 
whose charge I had left them, and the day after my arrival I 
started tying them out, though I had little hope of the tigress 
accepting them as bait. 

Five miles down the Nandhour valley nestles a little village at 
the foot of a great cliff of rock, some thousand or more feet 
high. The man-eater had, during the past few months, killed 
four people on the outskirts of this village. Shortly after I shot 
the leopard, a deputation came from this village to request me 
to move my camp from Dalkania to a site that had been 
selected for me near their village. I was told that the tiger had 
frequently been seen on the cliff above the village and that it 
appeared to have its home in one of the many caves in the cliff 
face. That very morning, I was informed, some women out 
cutting grass had seen the tiger, and the villagers were now in 
a state of terror, and too frightened to leave their homes. 
Promising the deputation I would do all I could to help them, I 
made a very early start next morning, climbed the hill opposite 
the village, and scanned the cliff for an hour or more through 
my field-glasses. I then crossed the valley, and by way of a very 
deep ravine climbed the cliff above the village. Here the going 
was very difficult and not at all to my liking, for added to the 
danger of a fall, which would have resulted in a broken neck, 
was the danger of an attack on ground on which it would be 
impossible to defend oneself. 

By 2 p.m. I had seen as much of the rock cliff as I shall ever 
want to see again, and was making my way up the valley 
towards my camp and breakfast, when on looking back before 
starting the stiff climb to Dalkania I saw two men running 
towards me from the direction in which I had just come. On 



joining me the men informed me that a tiger had just killed a 
bullock in the deep ravine up which I had gone earlier in the 
day. Telling one of the men to go on up to my camp and instruct 
my servant to send tea and some food, I turned round and, 
accompanied by the other man, retraced my steps down the 
valley 

The ravine where the bullock had been killed was about two 
hundred feet deep and one hundred feet wide. As we 
approached it I saw a number of vultures rising, and when we 
arrived at the kill I found the vultures had cleaned it out, 
leaving only the skin and bones. The spot where the remains of 
the bullock were lying was only a hundred yards from the 
village but there was no way up the steep bank, so my guide 
took me a quarter of a mile down the ravine, to where a cattle 
track crossed it. This track, after gaining the high ground, 
wound in and out through dense scrub jungle before it finally 
fetched up at the village. On arrival at the village I told the 
Headman that the vultures had ruined the kill, and asked him 
to provide me with a young buffalo and a short length of stout 
rope; while these were being procured, two of my men arrived 
from Dalkania with the food I had sent for. 

The sun was near setting when I re-entered the ravine, 
followed by several men leading a vigorous young male buffalo 
which the Headman had purchased for me from an adjoining 
village. Fifty yards from where the bullock had been killed, one 
end of a pine tree washed down from the hill above had been 
buried deep in the bed of the ravine After tying the buffalo very 
securely to the exposed end of the pine, the men returned to 
the village. There were no trees in the vicinity, and the only 
possible place for a sit-up was a narrow ledge on the village 
side of the ravine. With great difficulty I climbed to this ledge, 
which was about two feet wide by five feet long, and twenty 
feet above the bed of the ravine. From a little below the ledge 
the rock shelved inwards, forming a deep recess that was not 
visible from the ledge. The ledge canted downwards at an 
uncomfortable angle, and when I had taken my seat on it, I had 



my back towards the direction from which I expected the tiger 
to come, while the tethered buffalo was to my left front, and 
distant about thirty yards from me. 

The sun had set when the buffalo, who had been lying down, 
scrambled to his feet and faced up the ravine, and a moment 
later a stone came rolling down. It would not have been 
possible for me to have fired in the direction from which the 
sound had come, so to avoid detection I sat perfectly still. After 
some time the buffalo gradually turned to the left until he was 
facing in my direction. This showed that whatever he was 
frightened of— and I could see he was frightened— was in the 
recess below me. Presently the head of a tiger appeared 
directly under me. A head-shot at a tiger is only justified in an 
emergency, and any movement on my part might have betrayed 
my presence. For a long minute or two the head remained 
perfectly still, and then, with a quick dash forward, and one 
great bound, the tiger was on the buffalo. The buffalo, as I have 
stated, was facing the tiger, and to avoid a frontal attack with 
the possibility of injury from the buffalo's horns, the tiger's 
dash carried him to the left of the buffalo, and he made his 
attack at right angles. There was no fumbling for tooth-hold, no 
struggle, and no sound beyond the impact of the two heavy 
bodies, after which the buffalo lay quite still with the tiger lying 
partly over it and holding it by the throat. It is generally 
believed that tigers kill by delivering a smashing blow on the 
neck. This is incorrect. Tigers kill with their teeth. 

The right side of the tiger was towards me and, taking careful 
aim with the *275 I had armed myself with when leaving camp 
that morning, I fired. Relinquishing its hold on the buffalo, the 
tiger, without making a sound, turned and bounded off up the 
ravine and out of sight. Clearly a miss, for which I was unable 
to assign any reason. If the tiger had not seen me or the flash 
of the rifle there was a possibility that it would return; so 
recharging the rifle I sat on. 

The buffalo, after the tiger left him, lay without movement, and 



the conviction grew on me that I had shot him instead of the 
tiger. Ten, fifteen minutes had dragged by, when the tiger's 
head for a second time appeared from the recess below me. 
Again there was a long pause, and then, very slowly, the tiger 
emerged, walked up to the buffalo and stood looking down at 
it. With the whole length of the back as a target I was going to 
make no mistake the second time. Very carefully the sights 
were aligned, and the trigger slowly pressed; but instead of the 
tiger falling dead as I expected it to, it sprang to the left and 
went tearing up a little ravine, dislodging stones as it went up 
the steep hillside. 

Two shots fired in comparatively good light at a range of thirty 
yards, and heard by anxious villagers for miles round: and all I 
should have to show for them would be, certainly one, and 
quite possibly two, bullet holes in a dead buffalo. Clearly my 
eyesight was failing, or in climbing the rock I had knocked the 
foresight out of alignment. But on focussing my eyes on small 
objects I found there was nothing wrong with my eyesight, and 
a glance along the barrel showed that the sights were all right, 
so the only reason I could assign for having missed the tiger 
twice was bad shooting. 

There was no chance of the tiger returning a third time; and 
even if it did return, there was nothing to be gained by risking 
the possibility of only wounding it in bad light when I had not 
been able to kill it while the light had been comparatively good. 
Under these circumstances there was no object in my 
remaining any longer on the ledge. 

My clothes were still damp from my exertions earlier in the day, 
a cold wind was blowing and promised to get colder, my shorts 
were of thin khaki and the rock was hard and cold, and a hot 
cup of tea awaited me in the village. Good as these reasons 
were, there was a better and a more convincing reason for my 
remaining where I was— the man-eater. It was now quite dark. 
A quarter-of-a-mile walk, along a boulder-strewn ravine and a 
winding path through dense undergrowth, lay between me and 



the village. Beyond the suspicions of the villagers that the tiger 
they had seen the previous day— and that I had quite evidently 
just fired at— was the man-eater, I had no definite knowledge 
of the man-eater's whereabouts; and though at that moment 
she might have been fifty miles away she might also have been 
watching me from a distance of fifty yards, so, uncomfortable 
as my perch was, prudence dictated that I should remain where 
I was. As the long hours dragged by, the conviction grew on me 
that man-eater shooting, by night, was not a pastime that 
appealed to me, and that if this animal could not be shot during 
daylight hours she would have to be left to die of old age. This 
conviction was strengthened, when, cold and stiff, I started to 
climb down as soon as there was sufficient light to shoot by, 
and slipping on the dew-drenched rock completed the descent 
with my feet in the air. Fortunately I landed on a bed of sand, 
without doing myself or the rifle any injury. 

Early as it was I found the village astir, and I was quickly in the 
middle of a small crowd. In reply to the eager questions from 
all sides, I was only able to say that I had been firing at an 
imaginary tiger with blank ammunition. 

A pot of tea drunk while sitting near a roaring fire did much to 
restore warmth to my inner and outer man, and then, 
accompanied by most of the men and all the boys of the village, 
I went to where a rock jutted out over the ravine and directly 
above my overnight exploit. To the assembled throng I 
explained how the tiger had appeared from the recess under 
me and had bounded on to the buffalo, and how after I had 
fired it had dashed off in that direction; and as I pointed up the 
ravine there was an excited shout of 'Look, sahib, there's the 
tiger lying dead! 1 My eyes were strained with an all-night vigil, 
but even after looking away and back again there was no 
denying the fact that the tiger was lying there, dead. To the 
very natural question of why I had fired a second shot after a 
period of twenty or thirty minutes, I said that the tiger had 
appeared a second time from exactly the same place, and that I 
had fired at it while it was standing near the buffalo and that it 



had gone up that side ravine— and there were renewed shouts, 
in which the women and girls who had now come up joined, of 
'Look, sahib, there is another tiger lying dead!' Both tigers 
appeared to be about the same size and both were lying sixty 
yards from where I had fired. 

Questioned on the subject of this second tiger, the villagers 
said that when the four human beings had been killed, and also 
on the previous day when the bullock had been killed, only one 
tiger had been seen. The mating season for tigers is an elastic 
one extending from November to April, and the man-eater— if 
either of the two tigers lying within view was the man-eater- 
had evidently provided herself with a mate. 

A way into the ravine, down the steep rock face, was found 
some two hundred yards below where I had sat up, and, 
followed by the entire population of the village, I went past the 
dead buffalo to where the first tiger was lying. As I approached 
it hopes rose high, for she was an old tigress. Handing the rifle 
to the nearest man I got down on my knees to examine her feet. 
On that day when the tigress had tried to stalk the women 
cutting wheat she had left some beautiful pug marks on the 
edge of the field. They were the first pug marks I had seen of 
the man-eater, and I had examined them very carefully. They 
showed the tigress to be a very old animal, whose feet had 
splayed out with age. The pads of the forefeet were heavily 
rutted, one deep rut running right across the pad of the right 
forefoot, and the toes were elongated to a length I had never 
before seen in a tiger. With these distinctive feet it would have 
been easy to pick the man-eater out of a hundred dead tigers. 
The animal before me was, I found to my great regret, not the 
man-eater. When I conveyed this information to the assembled 
throng of people there was a murmur of strong dissent from all 
sides. It was asserted that I myself, on my previous visit, had 
declared the man-eater to be an old tigress, and such an animal 
I had now shot a few yards from where, only a short time 
previously, four of their number had been killed. Against this 
convincing evidence, of what value was the evidence of the 



feet, for the feet of all tigers were alike! 

The second tiger could, under the circumstances, only be a 
male, and while I made preparations to skin the tigress I sent a 
party of men to fetch him. The side ravine was steep and 
narrow, and after a great deal of shouting and laughter the 
second tiger — a fine male— was laid down alongside the 
tigress. 

The skinning of those two tigers that had been dead fourteen 
hours, with the sun beating down on my back and an 
evergrowing crowd pressing round, was one of the most 
unpleasant tasks I have ever undertaken. By early afternoon 
the job was completed, and with the skins neatly tied up for my 
men to carry I was ready to start on my five-mile walk back to 
camp. 

During the morning Headmen and others had come in from 
adjoining villages, and before leaving I assured them that the 
Chowgarh man-eater was not dead and warned them that the 
slackening of precautions would give the tigress the 
opportunity she was waiting for. Had my warning been heeded, 
the man-eater would not have claimed as many victims as she 
did during the succeeding months. 

There was no further news of the man-eater, and after a stay of 
a few weeks at Dalkania, I left to keep an appointment with the 
district officials in the terai. 

Ill 

In March 1930, Vivian, our District Commissioner, was touring 
through the man-eater's domain, and on the 22nd of the month 
I received an urgent request from him to go to Kala Agar, 
where he said he would await my arrival. It is roughly fifty 
miles from Naini Tal to Kala Agar, and two days after receipt of 
Vivian's letter I arrived in time for breakfast at the Kala Agar 
Forest Bungalow, where he and Mrs Vivian were staying. 

Over breakfast the Vivians told me they had arrived at the 
bungalow on the afternoon of the 21st, and while they were 



having tea on the verandah, one of six women who were 
cutting grass in the compound of the bungalow had been killed 
and carried off by the man-eater. Rifles were hurriedly seized 
and, accompanied by some of his staff, Vivian followed up the 
'drag' and found the dead woman tucked away under a bush at 
the foot of an oak tree. On examining the ground later, I found 
that on the approach of Vivian's party the tigress had gone off 
down the hill, and throughout the subsequent proceedings had 
remained in a thicket of raspberry bushes, fifty yards from the 
kill. A machan was put up in the oak tree for Vivian, and two 
others in trees near the forest road which passed thirty yards 
above the kill, for members of his staff. The machans were 
occupied as soon as they were ready and the party sat up the 
whole night, without, however, seeing anything of the tigress. 

Next morning the body of the woman was removed for 
cremation, and a young buffalo was tied up on the forest road 
about half a mile from the bungalow, and killed by the tigress 
the same night. The following evening the Vivians sat up over 
the buffalo. There was no moon, and just as daylight was fading 
out and nearby objects becoming indistinct, they first heard, 
and then saw an animal coming up to the kill, which in the 
uncertain light they mistook for a bear; but for this unfortunate 
mistake their very sporting effort would have resulted in their 
bagging the man-eater, for both the Vivians are good rifle 
shots. 

On the 25th the Vivians left Kala Agar, and during the course of 
the day my four buffaloes arrived from Dalkania. As the tigress 
now appeared to be inclined to accept this form of bait I tied 
them up at intervals of a few hundred yards along the forest 
road. For three nights in succession the tigress passed within a 
few feet of the buffaloes without touching them, but on the 
fourth night the buffalo nearest the bungalow was killed. On 
examining the kill in the morning I was disappointed to find 
that the buffalo had been killed by a pair of leopards I had 
heard calling the previous night above the bungalow. I did not 
like the idea of firing in this locality, for fear of driving away the 



tigress, but it was quite evident that if I did not shoot the 
leopards they would kill my three remaining buffaloes, so I 
stalked them while they were sunning themselves on some big 
rocks above the kill, and shot both of them. 

The forest road from the Kala Agar bungalow runs for several 
miles due west through very beautiful forests of pine, oak and 
rhododendron, and in these forests there is, compared with the 
rest of Kumaon, quite a lot of game in the way of sambur, kakar 
and pig, in addition to a great wealth of bird life. On two 
occasions I suspected the tigress of having killed sambur in this 
forest, and though on both occasions I found the bloodstained 
spot where the animal had been killed, I failed to find either of 
the kills. 

For the next fourteen days I spent all the daylight hours either 
on the forest road, on which no one but myself ever set foot, or 
in the jungle, and only twice during that period did I get near 
the tigress. On the first occasion I had been down to visit an 
isolated village, on the south face of Kala Agar ridge, that had 
been abandoned the previous year owing to the depredations of 
the man-eater, and on the way back had taken a cattle track 
that went over the ridge and down the far side to the forest 
road, when, approaching a pile of rocks, I suddenly felt there 
was danger ahead. The distance from the ridge to the forest 
road was roughly three hundred yards. Thte track, after leaving 
the ridge, went steeply down for a few yards and then turned to 
the right and ran diagonally across the hill for a hundred yards; 
the pile of rocks was about midway on the right-hand .side of 
this length of the track. Beyond the rocks a hairpin bend 
carried the track to the left, and a hundred yards further on, 
another sharp bend took it down to its junction with the forest 
road. 

I had been along this track many times, and this was the first 
occasion on which I hesitated to pass the rocks. To avoid them I 
should either have had to go several hundred yards through 
dense undergrowth, or make a wide detour round and above 



them; the former would have subjected me to very great 
danger, and there was no time for the latter, for the sun was 
near setting and I had still two miles to go. So, whether I liked 
it or not, there was nothing for it but to face the rocks. The 
wind was blowing up the hill so I was able to ignore the thick 
cover on the left of the track, and concentrate all my attention 
on the rocks to my right. A hundred feet would see me clear of 
the danger zone, and this distance I covered foot by foot, 
walking sideways with my face to the rocks and the rifle to my 
shoulder; a strange mode of progression, had there been any to 
see it. 

Thirty yards beyond the rocks was an open glade, starting from 
the right-hand side of the track and extending up the hill for 
fifty or sixty yards, and screened from the rocks by a fringe of 
bushes. In this glade a kakar was grazing. I saw her before she 
saw me, and watched her out of the corner of my eye. On 
catching sight of me she threw up her head, and as I was not 
looking in her direction and was moving slowly on she stood 
stock still, as these animals have a habit of doing when they are 
under the impression that they have not been seen. On arrival 
at the hairpin bend I looked over my shoulder and saw that the 
kakar had lowered her head, and was once more cropping the 
grass. 

I had walked a short distance along the track after passing the 
bend when the kakar went dashing up the hill, barking 
hysterically. In a few quick strides I was back at the bend, and 
was just in time to see a movement in the bushes on the lower 
side of the track. That the kakar had seen the tigress was quite 
evident, and the only place where she could have seen her was 
on the track. The movement I had seen might have been caused 
by the passage of a bird, on the other hand it might have been 
caused by the tigress; anyway, a little investigation was 
necessary before proceeding further on my way. 

A trickle of water seeping out from under the rocks had 
damped the red clay of which the track was composed, making 



an ideal surface for the impression of tracks. In this damp clay 
I had left footprints, and over these footprints I now found the 
splayed-out pug marks of the tigress where she had jumped 
down from the rocks and followed me, until the kakar had seen 
her and given its alarm-call, whereon the tigress had left the 
track and entered the bushes where I had seen the movement. 
The tigress was undoubtedly familiar with every foot of the 
ground, and not having had an opportunity of killing me at the 
rocks— and her chance of bagging me at the first hairpin bend 
having been spoilt by the kakar— she was probably now 
making her way through the dense undergrowth to try to 
intercept me at the second bend. 

Further progress along the track was now not advisable, so I 
followed the kakar up the glade, and turning to the left worked 
my way down, over open ground, to the forest road below. Had 
there been sufficient daylight I believe I could, that evening, 
have turned the tables on the tigress, for the conditions, after 
she left the shelter of the rocks, were all in my favour. I knew 
the ground as well as she did, and while she had no reason to 
suspect my intention towards her, I had the advantage of 
knowing, very clearly, her intentions towards me. However, 
though the cgnditions were in my favour, I was unable to take 
advantage of them owing to the lateness of the evening. 

I have made mention elsewhere of the sense that warns us of 
impending danger, and will not labour the subject further 
beyond stating that this sense is a very real one and that I do 
not know, and therefore cannot explain, what brings it into 
operation. On this occasion I had neither heard nor seen the 
tigress, nor had I received any indication from bird or beast of 
her presence, and yet I knew, without any shadow of doubt, 
that she was lying up for me among the rocks. I had been out 
for many hours that day and had covered many miles of jungle 
with unflagging caution, but without one moment's unease, and 
then, on cresting the ridge, and coming in sight of the rocks, I 
knew they held danger for me, and this knowledge was 
confirmed a few minutes later by the kakar's warning call to 



the jungle folk, and by my finding the man-eater's pug marks 
superimposed on my footprints. 

IV 

To those of my readers who have had the patience to 
accompany me so far in my narrative, I should like to give a 
clear and a detailed account of my first— and last— meeting 
with the tigress. 

The meeting took place in the early afternoon of the 11th of 
April 1930, nineteen days after my arrival at Kala Agar. 

I had gone out that day at 2 p.m. with the intention of tying up 
my three buffaloes at selected places along the forest road, 
when at a point a mile from the bungalow, where the road 
crosses a ridge and goes from the north to the west face of the 
Kala Agar range, I came on a large party of men who had been 
out collecting firewood. In the party was an old man who, 
pointing down the hill to a thicket of young oak trees some five 
hundred yards from where we were standing, said it was in 
that thicket where the man-eater, a month previously, had 
killed his only son, a lad eighteen years of age. I had not heard 
the father's version of the killing of his son, so, while we sat on 
the edge of the road smoking, he told his story, pointing out the 
spot where the lad had been killed, and where all that was left 
of him had been found the following day. The old man blamed 
the twenty-five men who had been out collecting firewood on 
that day for the death of his son, saying, very bitterly, that they 
had run away and left him to be killed by the tiger. Some of the 
men sitting near me had been in that party of twenty-five and 
they hotly repudiated responsibility for the lad's death, 
accusing him of having been responsible for the stampede by 
screaming out that he had heard the tiger growling and telling 
everyone to run for their lives. This did not satisfy the old man. 
He shook his head and said, 'You are grown men and he was 
only a boy, and you ran away and left him to be killed.' I was 
sorry for having asked the questions that had led to this heated 
discussion, and more to placate the old man than for any good 


it would do, I said I would tie up one of my buffaloes near the 
spot where he said his son had been killed. So, handing two of 
the buffaloes over to the party to take back to the bungalow, I 
set off followed by two of my men leading the remaining 
buffalo. 

A footpath, taking off close to where we had been sitting, went 
down the hill to the valley below and zigzagged up the opposite 
pine-clad slope to join the forest road two miles further on. The 
path passed close to an open patch of ground which bordered 
the oak thicket in which the lad had been killed. On this patch 
of ground, which was about thirty yards square, there was a 
solitary pine sapling. This I cut down. I tied the buffalo to the 
stump, set one man to cutting a supply of grass for it, and sent 
the other man, Madho Singh, who served in the Garhwalis 
during the Great War and is now serving in the United 
Provinces Civil Pioneer Force, up an oak tree with instructions 
to strike a dry branch with the head of his axe and call at the 
top of his voice as hill people do when cutting leaves for their 
cattle. I then took up a position on a rock, about four feet high, 
on the lower edge of the open ground. Beyond the rock the hill 
fell steeply away to the valley below and was densely clothed 
with tree and scrub jungle. 

The man on the ground had made several trips with the grass 
he had cut, and Madho Singh on the tree was alternately 
shouting and singing lustily, while I stood on the rock smoking, 
with the rifle in the hollow of my left arm, when, all at once, I 
became aware that the man-eater had arrived. Beckoning 
urgently to the man on the ground to come to me, I whistled to 
attract Madho Singh's attention and signalled to him to remain 
quiet. The ground on three sides was comparatively open. 
Madho Singh on the tree was to my left front, the man cutting 
grass had been in front of me, while the buffalo— now showing 
signs of uneasiness— was to my right front. In this area the 
tigress could not have approached without my seeing her; and 
as she had approached, there was only one place where she 
could now be, and that was behind and immediately below me. 



When taking up my position I had noticed that the further side 
of the rock was steep and smooth, that it extended down the 
hill for eight or ten feet, and that the lower portion of it was 
masked by thick undergrowth and young pine saplings. It 
would have been a little difficult, but quite possible, for the 
tigress to have climbed the rock, and I relied for my safety on 
hearing her in the undergrowth should she make the attempt. 

I have no doubt that the tigress, attracted, as I had intended 
she should be, by the noise Madho Singh was making, had 
come to the rock, and that it was while she was looking up at 
me and planning her next move that I had become aware of her 
presence. My change of front, coupled with the silence of the 
men, may have made her suspicious; anyway, after a lapse of a 
few minutes, I heard a dry twig snap a little way down the hill; 
thereafter the feeling of unease left me, and the tension 
relaxed. An opportunity lost; but there was still a very good 
chance of my getting a shot, for she would undoubtedly return 
before long, and when she found us gone would probably 
content herself with killing the buffalo. There were still four or 
five hours of daylight, and by crossing the valley and going up 
the opposite slope I should be able to overlook the whole of the 
hillside on which the buffalo was tethered. The shot, if I did get 
one, would be a long one of from two to three hundred yards, 
but the *275 rifle I was carrying was accurate, and even if I 
only wounded the tigress I should have a blood trail to follow, 
which would be better than feeling about for her in hundreds of 
square miles of jungle, as I had been doing these many months. 

The men were a difficulty. To have sent them back to the 
bungalow alone would have been nothing short of murder, so of 
necessity I kept them with me. 

Tying the buffalo to the stump in such a manner as to make it 
impossible for the tigress to cany it away, I left the open ground 
and rejoined the path to carry out the plan I have outlined, of 
trying to get a shot from the opposite hill. 

About a hundred yards along the path I came to a ravine. On 



the far side of this the path entered very heavy undergrowth, 
and as it was inadvisable to go into thick cover with two men 
following me, I decided to take to the ravine, follow it down to 
its junction with the valley, work up the valley and pick up the 
path on the far side of the undergrowth. 

The ravine was about ten yards wide and four or five feet deep, 
and as I stepped down into it a nightjar fluttered off a rock on 
which I had put my hand. On looking at the spot from which the 
bird had risen, I saw two eggs. These eggs, straw-coloured, 
with rich brown markings, were of a most unusual shape, one 
being long and very pointed, while the other was as round as a 
marble; and as my collection lacked nightjar eggs I decided to 
add this odd clutch to it. I had no receptacle of any kind in 
which to carry the eggs, so cupping my left hand I placed the 
eggs in it and packed them round with a little moss. 

As I went down the ravine the banks became higher, and sixty 
yards from where I had entered it I came on a deep drop of 
some twelve to fourteen feet. The water that rushes down all 
these hill ravines in the rains had worn the rock as smooth as 
glass, and as it was too steep to offer a foothold I handed the 
rifle to the men and, sitting on the edge, proceeded to slide 
down. My feet had hardly touched the sandy bottom when the 
two men, with a flying leap, landed one on either side of me, 
and thrusting the rifle into my hand asked in a very agitated 
manner if I had heard the tiger. As a matter of fact I had heard 
nothing, possibly due to the scraping of my clothes on the 
rocks, and when questioned, the men said that what they had 
heard was a deep-throated growl from somewhere close at 
hand, but exactly from which direction the sound had come, 
they were unable to say. Tigers do not betray their presence by 
growling when looking for their dinner and the only, and very 
unsatisfactory, explanation I can offer is that the tigress 
followed us after we left the open ground, and on seeing that 
we were going down the ravine had gone ahead and taken up a 
position where the ravine narrowed to half its width; and that 
when she was on the point of springing out on me, I had 



disappeared out of sight down the slide and she had 
involuntarily given vent to her disappointment with a low 
growl. Not a satisfactory reason, unless one assumes— without 
any reason— that she had selected me for her dinner, and 
therefore had no interest in the two men. 

Where the three of us now stood in a bunch we had the smooth 
steep rock behind us, to our right a wall of rock slightly leaning 
over the ravine and fifteen feet high, and to our left a tumbled 
bank of big rocks thirty or forty feet high. The sandy bed of the 
ravine, on which we were standing, was roughly forty feet long 
and ten feet wide. At the lower end of this sandy bed a great 
pine tree had fallen across, damming the ravine, and the 
collection of the sand was due to this dam. The wall of 
overhanging rock came to an end twelve or fifteen feet from 
the fallen tree, and as I approached the end of the rock, my feet 
making no sound on the sand, I very fortunately noticed that 
the sandy bed continued round to the back of the rock. 

This rock about which I have said so much I can best describe 
as a giant school slate, two feet thick at its lower end, and 
standing up— not quite perpendicularly— on one of its long 
sides. 

As I stepped clear of the giant slate, I looked behind me over 
my right shoulder and— looked straight into the tigress's face. 

I would like you to have a clear picture of the situation. 

The sandy bed behind the rock was quite flat. To the right of it 
was the smooth slate fifteen feet high and leaning slightly 
outwards, to the left of it was a scoured-out steep bank also 
some fifteen feet high overhung by a dense tangle of thorn 
bushes, while at the far end was a slide similar to, but a little 
higher than, the one I had glissaded down. The sandy bed, 
enclosed by these three natural walls, was about twenty feet 
long and half as wide, and lying on it, with her fore-paws 
stretched out and her hind legs well tucked under her, was the 
tigress. Her head, which was raised a few inches off her paws. 



was eight feet (measured later) from me, and on her face was a 
smile, similar to that one sees on the face of a dog welcoming 
his master home after a long absence. 

Two thoughts flashed through my mind, one, that it was up to 
me to make the first move, and the other, that the move would 
have to be made in such a manner as not to alarm the tigress 
or make her nervous. 

The rifle was in my right hand held diagonally across my chest, 
with the safety-catch off, and in order to get it to bear on the 
tigress the muzzle would have to be swung round three- 
quarters of a circle. 

The movement of swinging round the rifle, with one hand, was 
begun very slowly, and hardly perceptibly, and when a quarter 
of a circle had been made, the stock came in contact with my 
right side. It was now necessary to extend my arm, and as the 
stock cleared my side, the swing was very slowly continued. My 
arm was now at full stretch and the weight of the rifle was 
beginning to tell. Only a little further now for the muzzle to go, 
and the tigress— who had not once taken her eyes off mine— 
was still looking up at me, with the pleased expression still on 
her face. 

How long it took the rifle to make the three-quarter circle, I am 
not in a position to say. To me, looking into the tigress's eyes 
and unable therefore to follow the movement of the barrel, it 
appeared that my arm was paralysed, and that the swing would 
never be completed. However, the movement was completed at 
last, and as soon as the rifle was pointing at the tigress's body, 

I pressed the trigger. 

I heard the report, exaggerated in that restricted space, and 
felt the jar of the recoil, and but for these tangible proofs that 
the rifle had gone off, I might, for all the immediate result the 
shot produced, have been in the grip of one of those awful 
nightmares in which triggers are vainly pulled of rifles that 
refuse to be discharged at the critical moment. 



For a perceptible fraction of time the tigress remained 
perfectly still, and then, very slowly, her head sank on to her 
outstretched paws, while at the same time a jet of blood issued 
from the bullet-hole. The bullet had injured her spine and 
shattered the upper portion of her heart. 

The two men who were following a few yards behind me, and 
who were separated from the tigress by the thickness of the 
rock, came to a halt when they saw me stop and turn my head. 
They knew instinctively that I had seen the tigress and judged 
from my behaviour that she was close at hand, and Madho 
Singh said afterwards that he wanted to call out and tell me to 
drop the eggs and get both hands on the rifle. When I had fired 
my shot and lowered the point of the rifle on to my toes, Madho 
Singh, at a sign, came forward to relieve me of it, for very 
suddenly my legs appeared to be unable to support me, so I 
made for the fallen tree and sat down. Even before looking at 
the pads of her feet I knew it was the Chowgarh tigress I had 
sent to the Happy Hunting Grounds, and that the shears that 
had assisted her to cut the threads of sixty-four human lives— 
the people of the district put the number at twice that figure- 
had, while the game was in her hands, turned, and cut the 
thread of her own life. 

Three things, each of which would appear to you to have been 
to my disadvantage, were actually in my favour. These were (a) 
the eggs in my left hand, (b) the light rifle I was carrying, and 
(c) the tiger being a man-eater. If I had not had the eggs in my 
hand I should have had both hands on the rifle, and when I 
looked back and saw the tiger at such close quarters I should 
instinctively have tried to swing round to face her, and the 
spring that was arrested by my lack of movement would 
inevitably have been launched. Again, if the rifle had not been a 
light one it would not have been possible for me to have moved 
it in the way it was imperative I should move it, and then 
discharge it at the full extent of my arm. And lastly, if the tiger 
had been just an ordinary tiger, and not a man-eater, it would, 
on finding itself cornered, have made for the opening and 



wiped me out of the way; and to be wiped out of the way by a 
tiger usually has fatal results. 

While the men made a detour and went up the hill to free the 
buffalo and secure the rope, which was needed for another and 
more pleasant purpose, I climbed over the rocks and went up 
the ravine to restore the eggs to their rightful owner. I plead 
guilty of being as superstitious as my brother sportsmen. For 
three long periods, extending over a whole year, I had tried— 
and tried hard— to get a shot at the tigress, and had failed; and 
now within a few minutes of having picked up the eggs my luck 
had changed. 


The eggs, which all this time had remained safely in the hollow 
of my left hand, were still warm when I replaced them in the 
little depression in the rock that did duty as a nest, and when I 
again passed that way half an hour later, they had vanished 
under the brooding mother whose colouring so exactly matched 
the mottled rock that it was difficult for me, who knew the 
exact spot where the nest was situated, to distinguish her from 
her surroundings. 

The buffalo, who after months of care was now so tame that it 
followed like a dog, came scrambling down the hill in the wake 
of the men, nosed the tigress and lay down on the sand to chew 
the cud of contentment, while we lashed the tigress to the stout 
pole the men had cut. 

I had tried to get Madho Singh to return to the bungalow for 
help, but this he would not hear of doing. With no one would he 
and his companion share the honour of carrying in the man- 
eater, and if I would lend a hand the task, he said, with 
frequent halts for rest, would not be too difficult. We were 
three hefty men— two accustomed from childhood to carrying 
heavy loads— and all three hardened by a life of exposure; but 
even so, the task we set ourselves was a herculean one. 

The path down which we had come was too narrow and too 



winding for the long pole to which the tigress was lashed, so, 
with frequent halts to regain breath and readjust pads to 
prevent the pole biting too deep into shoulder muscles, we 
went straight up the hill through a tangle of raspberry and 
briar bushes, on the thorns of which we left a portion of our 
clothing and an amount of skin which made bathing for many 
days a painful operation. 

The sun was still shining on the surrounding hills when three 
dishevelled and very happy men, followed by a buffalo, carried 
the tigress to the Kala Agar Forest Bungalow, and from that 
evening to this day no human being has been killed— or 
wounded— over the hundreds of square miles of mountain and 
vale over which the Chowgarh tigress, for a period of five 
years, held sway 

I have added one more cross and date to the map of Eastern 
Kumaon that hangs on the wall before me— the cross and the 
date the man-eater earned. The cross is two miles west of Kala 
Agar, and the date under it is 11 April 1930. 

The tigress's claws were broken, and bushed out, and one of 
her canine teeth was broken, and her front teeth were worn 
down to the bone. It was these defects that had made her a 
man-eater and were the cause of her not being able to kill 
outright— and by her own efforts— a large proportion of the 
human beings she had attacked since the day she had been 
deprived of the assistance of the cub I had, on my first visit, 
shot by mistake. 



The Bachelor of Powalgarh 

I 

THREE miles from our winter home, and in the heart of the 
forest, there is an open glade some four hundred yards long 
and half as wide, grassed with emerald-green and surrounded 
with big trees interlaced with cane creepers. It was in this 
glade, which for beauty has no equal, that I first saw the tiger 
who was known throughout the United Provinces as 'The 
Bachelor of Powalgarh 1 , who from 1920 to 1930 was the most 
sought-after big-game trophy in the province. 

The sun had just risen one winter's morning when I crested the 
high ground overlooking the glade. On the far side, a score of 
red jungle fowl were scratching among the dead leaves 
bordering a crystal-clear stream, and scattered over the 
emerald-green grass, now sparkling with dew, fifty or more 
chital were feeding. Sitting on a tree stump and smoking, I had 
been looking at this scene for some time when the hind nearest 
to me raised her head, turned in my direction and called; and a 
moment later the Bachelor stepped into the open, from the 
thick bushes below me. For a long minute he stood with head 
held high surveying the scene, and then with slow unhurried 
steps started to cross the glade. In his rich winter coat, which 
the newly risen sun was lighting up, he was a magnificent sight 
as, with head turning now to the right and now to the left, he 
walked down the wide lane the deer had made for him. At the 
stream he lay down and quenched his thirst, then sprang 
across and, as he entered the dense tree jungle beyond, called 
three times in acknowledgement of the homage the jungle folk 
had paid him, for from the time he had entered the glade every 
chital had called, every jungle fowl had cackled, and every one 
of a troupe of monkeys on the trees had chattered. 

The Bachelor was far afield that morning, for his home was in a 
ravine six miles away. Living in an area in which the majority of 
tigers are bagged with the aid of elephants, he had chosen his 
home wisely. The ravine, running into the foot-hills, was half a 



mile long, with steep hills on either side rising to a height of a 
thousand feet. At the upper end of the ravine there was a 
waterfall some twenty feet high, and at the lower end, where 
the water had cut through red clay, it narrowed to four feet. 

Any sportsman, therefore, who wished to try conclusions with 
the Bachelor, while he was at home, would of a necessity have 
to do so on foot. It was this secure retreat, and the Government 
rules prohibiting night shooting, that had enabled the Bachelor 
to retain possession of his much sought-after skin. 

In spite of the many and repeated attempts that had been made 
to bag him with the aid of buffalo bait, the Bachelor had never 
been fired at, though on two occasions, to my knowledge, he 
had only escaped death by the skin of his teeth. On the first 
occasion, after a perfect beat, a guy rope by which the machan 
was suspended interfered with the movement of Fred 
Anderson's rifle at the critical moment, and on the second 
occasion the Bachelor arrived at the machan before the beat 
started and found Huish Edye filling his pipe. On both these 
occasions he had been viewed at a range of only a few feet, and 
while Anderson described him as being as big as a Shetland 
pony, Edye said he was as big as a donkey. 

The winter following these and other unsuccessful attempts, I 
took Wyndham, our Commissioner, who knows more about 
tigers than any other man in India, to a fire track skirting the 
upper end of the ravine in which the Bachelor lived, to show 
him the fresh pug marks of the tiger which I had found on the 
fire track that morning. Wyndham was accompanied by two of 
his most experienced shikaris, and after the three of them had 
carefully measured and examined the pug marks, Wyndham 
said that in his opinion the tiger was ten feet between pegs, 
and while one shikari said he was 10' 5" over curves, the other 
said he was 10' 6" or a little more. All three agreed that they 
had never seen the pug marks of a bigger tiger. 

In 1930 the Forest Department started extensive fellings in the 
area surrounding the Bachelor's home and annoyed at the 



disturbance he changed his quarters; this I learnt from two 
sportsmen who had taken out a shooting pass with the object of 
hunting down the tiger. Shooting passes are only issued for 
fifteen days of each month, and throughout that winter, 
shooting party after shooting party failed to make contact with 
the tiger. 

Towards the end of the winter an old dak runner, who passes 
our gate every morning and evening on his seven-mile run 
through the forest to a hill village, came to me one evening and 
reported that on his way out that morning he had seen the 
biggest pug marks of a tiger that he had seen during the thirty 
years of his service. The tiger, he said, had come from the west 
and after proceeding along the road for two hundred yards had 
gone east, taking a path that started from near an almond tree. 
This tree was about two miles from our home, and was a well- 
known landmark. The path the tiger had taken runs through 
very heavy jungle for half a mile before crossing a wide 
watercourse, and then joins a cattle track which skirts the foot 
of the hills before entering a deep and well-wooded valley; a 
favourite haunt of tigers. 

Early next morning, with Robin at my heels, I set out to 
prospect, my objective being the point where the cattle track 
entered the valley, for at this point the tracks of all the animals 
entering or leaving the valley are to be found. From the time 
we started Robin appeared to know that we had a special job in 
hand and he paid not the least attention to the jungle fowl we 
disturbed, the kakar (barking deer) that let us get quite close 
to it, and the two sambur that stood and belled at us. Where 
the cattle track entered the valley the ground was hard and 
stony, and when we reached this spot Robin put down his head 
and very carefully smelt the stones, and on receiving a signal 
from me to carry on he turned and started down the track, 
keeping a yard ahead of me; I could tell from his behaviour that 
he was on the scent of a tiger, and that the scent was hot. A 
hundred yards further down, where the track flattens out and 
runs along the foot of the hill, the ground is soft; here I saw the 



pug marks of a tiger, and a glance at them satisfied me we 
were on the heels of the Bachelor and that he was only a 
minute or two ahead of us. 

Beyond the soft ground the track runs for three hundred yards 
over stones, before going steeply down onto an open plain. If 
the tiger kept to the track we should probably see him on this 
open ground. We had gone another fifty yards when Robin 
stopped and, after running his nose up and down a blade of 
grass on the left of the track, turned and entered the grass 
which was here about two feet high. On the far side of the 
grass there was a patch of clerodendron, about forty yards 
wide. This plant grows in dense patches to a height of five feet, 
and has widely spread leaves and a big head of flowers not 
unlike horse-chestnut. It is greatly fancied by tiger, sambur and 
pig because of the shade it gives. When Robin reached the 
clerodendron he stopped and backed towards me, thus telling 
me that he could not see into the bushes ahead and wished to 
be carried. Lifting him up, I put his hind legs into my left-hand 
pocket, and when he had hooked his forefeet over my left arm, 
he was safe and secure, and I had both hands free for the rifle. 
On these occasions Robin was always in deadly earnest, and no 
matter what he saw, or how our quarry behaved before or after 
fired at, he never moved and spoilt my shot, or impeded my 
view. Proceeding very slowly, we had gone half-way through the 
clerodendron when I saw the bushes directly in front of us 
swaying. Waiting until the tiger had cleared the bushes, I went 
forward expecting to see him in the more or less open jungle, 
but he was nowhere in sight, and when I put Robin down he 
turned to the left and indicated that the tiger had gone into a 
deep and narrow ravine nearby. This ravine ran to the foot of 
an isolated hill on which there were caves frequented by tigers, 
and as I was not armed to deal with a tiger at close quarters, 
and further, as it was time for breakfast, Robin and I turned 
and made for home. 

After breakfast I returned alone, armed with a heavy *450 rifle, 
and as I approached the hill, which in the days of the long ago 



had been used by the local inhabitants as a rallying point 
against the Gurkha invaders, I heard the boom of a big buffalo 
bell, and a man shouting. These sounds were coming from the 
top of the hill, which is flat, and about half an acre in extent, so 
I climbed up and saw a man on a tree, striking a dead branch 
with the head of his axe and shouting, while at the foot of the 
tree a number of buffaloes were collected. When he saw me the 
man called out, saying I had just arrived in time to save him 
and his buffaloes from a shaitan of a tiger, the size of a camel, 
that had been threatening them for hours. From his story I 
gathered that he had arrived on the hill shortly after Robin and 
I had left for home, and that as he started to cut bamboo leaves 
for his buffaloes he saw a tiger coming towards him. He 
shouted to drive the tiger away, as he had done on many 
previous occasions with other tigers, but instead of going away 
this one had started to growl. He took to his heels, followed by 
his buffaloes, and climbed up the nearest tree. The tiger, 
paying no heed to his shouts, had then set to pacing round and 
round, while the buffaloes kept their heads towards it. Probably 
the tiger had heard me coming, for it had left only a moment 
before I had arrived. The man was an old friend, who before his 
quarrel with the Headman of his village had done a 
considerable amount of poaching in these jungles with the 
Headman's gun. He now begged me to conduct both himself 
and his cattle safely out of the jungle; so telling him to lead on, 

I followed behind to see that there were no stragglers. At first 
the buffaloes were disinclined to break up their close 
formation, but after a little persuasion we got them to start, 
and we had gone half-way across the open plain I have alluded 
to when the tiger called in the jungle to our right. The man 
quickened his pace, and I urged on the buffaloes, for a mile of 
very thick jungle lay between us and the wide, open 
watercourse beyond which lay my friend's village and safety for 
his buffaloes. 

I have earned the reputation of being keener on photographing 
animals than on killing them, and before I left my friend he 



begged me to put aside photography for this once, and kill the 
tiger, which he said was big enough to eat a buffalo a day, and 
ruin him in twenty-five days. I promised to do my best and 
turned to retrace my steps to the open plain, to meet with an 
experience every detail of which has burnt itself deep into my 
memory. 

On reaching the plain I sat down to wait for the tiger to 
disclose his whereabouts, or for the jungle folk to tell me where 
he was. It was then about 3 p.m., and as the sun was warm and 
comforting, I put my head down on my drawn-up knees and had 
been dozing a few minutes when I was awakened by the tiger 
calling; thereafter he continued to call at short intervals. 

Between the plain and the hills there is a belt, some half-mile 
wide, of the densest scrub jungle for a hundred miles round, 
and I located the tiger as being on the hills on the far side of 
the scrub— about three-quarters of a mile from me— and from 
the way he was calling it was evident he was in search of a 
mate. 

Starting from the upper left-hand corner of the plain, and close 
to where I was sitting, an old cart track, used some years 
previously for extracting timber, ran in an almost direct line to 
where the tiger was calling. This track would take me in the 
direction of the calling animal, but on the hills was high grass, 
and without Robin to help me there would be little chance of 
my seeing him. So instead of my going to look for the tiger, I 
decided he should come and look for me. I was too far away for 
him to hear me, so I sprinted up the cart track for a few 
hundred yards, laid down my rifle, climbed to the top of a high 
tree and called three times. I was immediately answered by the 
tiger. After climbing down, I ran back, calling as I went, and 
arrived on the plain without having found a suitable place in 
which to sit and await the tiger. Something would have to be 
done and done in a hurry, for the tiger was rapidly coming 
nearer, so, after rejecting a little hollow which I found to be full 
of black stinking water, I lay down flat in the open, twenty 



yards from where the track entered the scrub. From this point I 
had a clear view up the track for fifty yards, to where a bush, 
leaning over it, impeded my further view. If the tiger came 
down the track, as I expected him to, I decided to fire at him as 
soon as he cleared the obstruction. 

After opening the rifle to make quite sure it was loaded, I threw 
off the safety-catch, and with elbows comfortably resting on the 
soft ground waited for the tiger to appear. I had not called 
since I came out on the plain, so to give him direction I now 
gave a low call, which he immediately answered from a 
distance of a hundred yards. If he came on at his usual pace, I 
judged he would clear the obstruction in thirty seconds. I 
counted this number very slowly, and went on counting up to 
eighty, when out of the corner of my eye I saw a movement to 
my right front, where the bushes approached to within ten 
yards of me. Turning my eyes in that direction I saw a great 
head projecting above the bushes, which here were four feet 
high. The tiger was only a foot or two inside the bushes, but all 
I could see of him was his head. As I very slowly swung the 
point of the rifle round and ran my eyes along the sights I 
noticed that his head was not quite square on to me, and as I 
was firing up and he was looking down, I aimed an inch below 
his right eye, pressed the trigger, and for the next half-hour 
nearly died of fright. 

Instead of dropping dead as I expected him to, the tiger went 
straight up into the air above the bushes for his full length, 
falling backwards onto a tree a foot thick which had been 
blown down in a storm and was still green. With unbelievable 
fury he attacked this tree and tore it to bits, emitting as he did 
so roar upon roar, and what was even worse, a dreadful 
bloodcurdling sound as though he was savaging his worst 
enemy. The branches of the tree tossed about as though struck 
by a tornado, while the bushes on my side shook and bulged 
out, and every moment I expected to have him on top of me, for 
he had been looking at me when I fired, and knew where I was. 



Too frightened even to recharge the rifle for fear the slight 
movement and sound should attract the attention of the tiger, I 
lay and sweated for half an hour with my finger on the left 
trigger. At last the branches of the tree and the bushes ceased 
waving about, and the roaring became less frequent, and 
eventually, to my great relief, ceased. For another half-hour I 
lay perfectly still, with arms cramped by the weight of the 
heavy rifle, and then started to pull myself backwards with my 
toes. After progressing for thirty yards in this manner I got to 
my feet, and, crouching low, made for the welcome shelter of 
the nearest tree. Here I remained for some minutes, and as all 
was now silent I turned and made for home. 

II 

Next morning I returned accompanied by one of my men, an 
expert tree-climber. I had noticed the previous evening that 
there was a tree growing on the edge of the open ground, and 
about forty yards from where the tiger had fallen. We 
approached this tree very cautiously, and I stood behind it 
while the man climbed to the top. After a long and a careful 
scrutiny he looked down and shook his head, and when he 
rejoined me on the ground he told me that the bushes over a 
big area had been flattened down, but that the tiger was not in 
sight. 

I sent him back to his perch on the tree with instructions to 
keep a sharp lookout and warn me if he saw any movement in 
the bushes, and went forward to have a look at the spot where 
the tiger had raged. He had raged to some purpose, for, in 
addition to tearing branches and great strips of wood off the 
tree, he had torn up several bushes by the roots, and bitten 
down others. Blood in profusion was sprinkled everywhere, and 
on the ground were two congealed pools, near one of which 
was lying a bit of bone two inches square, which I found on 
examination to be part of the tiger's skull. 

No blood trail led away from this spot and this, combined with 
the two pools of blood, was proof that the tiger was still here 


when I left and that the precautions I had taken the previous 
evening had been very necessary for when I started on my 'get¬ 
away' I was only ten yards from the most dangerous animal in 
the world— a freshly wounded tiger. On circling round the spot 
I found a small smear of blood here and there on leaves that 
had brushed against his face. Noting that these indications of 
the tiger's passage led in a direct line to a giant semul tree 
(Bombax malabaricum, the silk cotton tree.) two hundred yards 
away I went back and climbed the tree my man was on in order 
to get a bird's-eye view of the ground I should have to go over, 
for I had a very uneasy feeling that I should find him alive: a 
tiger shot in the head can live for days and can even recover 
from the wound. True, this tiger had a bit of his skull missing, 
and as I had never dealt with an animal in his condition before 
I did not know whether he was likely to live for a few hours or 
days, or live on to die of old age. For this reason I decided to 
treat him as an ordinary wounded tiger, and not to take any 
avoidable risks when following him up. 

From my elevated position on the tree I saw that, a little to the 
left of the line to the semul tree, there were two trees, the 
nearer one thirty yards from where the blood was, and the 
other fifty yards further on. Leaving my man on the tree, I 
climbed down, picked up my rifle and a shot-gun and bag of a 
hundred cartridges, and very cautiously approached the nearer 
tree and climbed up it to a height of thirty feet, pulling the rifle 
and gun, which I had tied to one end of a strong cord, up after 
me. After fixing the rifle in a fork of the tree where it would be 
handy if needed, I started to spray the bushes with small shot, 
yard by yard up to the foot of the second tree. I did this with 
the object of locating the tiger, assuming he was alive and in 
that area, for a wounded tiger, on hearing a shot fired close to 
him, or on being struck by a pellet, will either growl or charge. 
Receiving no indication of the tiger's presence I went to the 
second tree, and sprayed the bushes to within a few yards of 
the semul tree, firing the last shot at the tree itself. After this 
last shot I thought I heard a low growl, but it was not repeated 



and I put it down to my imagination. My bag of cartridges was 
now empty so after recovering my man I called it a day and 
went home. 

When I returned next morning I found my friend the buffalo 
man feeding his buffaloes on the plain. He appeared to be very 
much relieved to see me, and the reason for this I learnt later. 
The grass was still wet with dew, but we found a dry spot and 
there sat down to have a smoke and relate our experiences. My 
friend, as I have already told you, had done a lot of poaching, 
and having spent all his life in tiger-infested jungles tending his 
buffaloes, or shooting, his jungle knowledge was considerable. 

After I had left him that day at the wide, open water-course, he 
had crossed to the far side and had sat down to listen for 
sounds coming from the direction in which I had gone. He had 
heard two tigers calling; he had heard my shot followed by the 
continuous roaring of a tiger, and very naturally concluded I 
had wounded one of the tigers and that it had killed me. On his 
return next morning to the same spot, he had been greatly 
mystified by hearing a hundred shots fired, and this morning, 
not being able to contain his curiosity any longer, he had come 
to see what had happened. Attracted by the smell of blood, his 
buffaloes had shown him where the tiger had fallen, and he had 
seen the patches of dry blood and had found the bit of bone. No 
animal in his opinion could possibly live for more than a few 
hours after having a bit of its skull blown away, and so sure was 
he that the tiger was dead that he offered to take his buffaloes 
into the jungle and find it for me. I had heard of this method of 
recovering tigers with the help of buffaloes but had never tried 
it myself, and after my friend had agreed to accepting 
compensation for any damage to his cattle I accepted his offer. 

Rounding up the buffaloes, twenty-five in number, and keeping 
to the line I had sprinkled with shot the previous day, we made 
for the semul tree, followed by the buffaloes. Our progress was 
slow, for not only had we to move the chin-high bushes with our 
hands to see where to put our feet, but we also had frequently 



to check a very natural tendency on the part of the buffaloes to 
stray As we approached the semul tree, where the bushes were 
lighter, I saw a little hollow filled with dead leaves that had 
been pressed flat and on which were several patches of blood, 
some dry, others in process of congealing, and one quite fresh; 
and when I put my hand to the ground I found it was warm. 
Incredible as it may appear, the tiger had lain in this hollow the 
previous day while I had expended a hundred cartridges, and 
had only moved off when he saw us and the buffaloes 
approaching. The buffaloes had now found the blood and were 
pawing up the ground and snorting, and as the prospect of 
being caught between a charging tiger and angry buffaloes did 
not appeal to me, I took hold of my friend's arm, turned him 
round and made for the open plain, followed by the buffaloes. 
When we were back on safe ground I told the man to go home, 
and said I would return next day and deal with the tiger alone. 

The path through the jungles that I had taken each day when 
coming from and going home ran for some distance over soft 
ground, and on this soft ground, on this fourth day, I saw the 
pug marks of a big male tiger. By following these pug marks I 
found the tiger had entered the dense brushwood a hundred 
yards to the right of the semul tree. Here was an unexpected 
complication, for if I now saw a tiger in this jungle I should not 
know— unless I got a very close look at it— whether it was the 
wounded or the unwounded one. However, this contingency 
would have to be dealt with when met, and in the meantime 
worrying would not help, so I entered the bushes and made for 
the hollow at the foot of the semul tree. 

There was no blood trail to follow so I zigzagged through the 
bushes, into which it was impossible to see further than a few 
inches, for an hour or more, until I came to a ten-foot-wide dry 
watercourse. Before stepping down into this watercourse I 
looked up it, and saw the left hind leg and tail of a tiger. The 
tiger was standing perfectly still with its body and head hidden 
by a tree, and only this one leg visible. I raised the rifle to my 
shoulder, and then lowered it. To have broken the leg would 



have been easy; for the tiger was only ten yards away and it 
would have been the right thing to do if its owner was the 
wounded animal; but there were two tigers in this area, and to 
have broken the leg of the wrong one would have doubled my 
difficulties, which were already considerable. Presently the leg 
was withdrawn and I heard the tiger moving away, and going to 
the spot where he had been standing I found a few drops of 
blood— too late now to regret not having broken that leg. 

A quarter of a mile further on there was a little stream, and it 
was possible that the tiger, now recovering from his wound, 
was making for this stream. With the object of intercepting him 
or failing that, waiting for him at the water, I took a game path 
which I knew went to the stream and had proceeded along it 
for some distance when a sambur belled to my left, and went 
dashing off through the jungle. It was evident now that I was 
abreast of the tiger, and I had only taken a few more steps 
when I heard the loud crack of a dry stick breaking as though 
some heavy animal had fallen on it; the sound had come from a 
distance of fifty yards and from the exact spot where the 
sambur had belled. The sambur had in unmistakable tones 
warned the jungle folk of the presence of a tiger, and the stick 
therefore could only have been broken by the same animal; so 
getting down on my hands and knees I started to crawl in the 
direction from which the sound had come. 

The bushes here were from six to eight feet high, with dense 
foliage on the upper branches and very few leaves on the 
stems, so that I could see through them for a distance of ten to 
fifteen feet. I had covered thirty yards, hoping fervently that if 
the tiger charged he would come from in front (for in no other 
direction could I have fired), when I caught sight of something 
red on which the sun, drifting through the upper leaves, was 
shining; it might only be a bunch of dead leaves; on the other 
hand, it might be the tiger. I could get a better view of this 
object from two yards to the right so, lowering my head until 
my chin touched the ground, I crawled this distance with belly 
to ground, and on raising my head saw the tiger in front of me. 



He was crouching down looking at me, with the sun shining on 
his left shoulder, and on receiving my two bullets he rolled over 
on his side without making a sound. 

As I stood over him and ran my eyes over his magnificent 
proportions it was not necessary to examine the pads of his feet 
to know that before me lay the Bachelor of Powalgarh. 

The entry of the bullet fired four days previously was hidden by 
a wrinkle of skin, and at the back of his head was a big hole 
which, surprisingly, was perfectly clean and healthy 

The report of my rifle was, I knew, being listened for, so I 
hurried home to relieve anxiety, and while I related the last 
chapter of the hunt and drank a pot of tea my men were 
collecting. 

Accompanied by my sister and Robin and a carrying party of 
twenty men, I returned to where the tiger was lying, and before 
he was roped to a pole my sister and I measured him from nose 
to tip of tail, and from tip of tail to nose. At home we again 
measured him to make quite sure we had made no mistake the 
first time. These measurements are valueless, for there were 
no independent witnesses present to certify them; they are 
however interesting as showing the accuracy with which 
experienced woodsmen can judge the length of a tiger from his 
pug marks. Wyndham, you will remember, said the tiger was 
ten feet between pegs, which would give roughly 10' 6" over 
curves; and while one shikari said he was 10' 5" over curves, 
the other said he was 10' 6" or a little more. Shot seven years 
after these estimates were made, my sister and I measured the 
tiger as being 10' 7" over curves. 

I have told the story at some length, as I feel sure that those 
who hunted the tiger between 1920 and 1930 will be interested 
to know how the Bachelor of Powalgarh met his end. 



he Mohan Man-Eater 


I 

EIGHTEEN miles from our summer home in the Himalayas 
there is a long ridge running east and west, some 9,000 feet in 
height. On the upper slopes of the eastern end of this ridge 
there is a luxuriant growth of oat grass; below this grass the 
hill falls steeply away in a series of rock cliffs to the Kosi river 
below. 

One day a party of women and girls from the village on the 
north face of the ridge were cutting the oat grass, when a tiger 
suddenly appeared in their midst. In the stampede that 
followed an elderly woman lost her footing, rolled down the 
steep slope, and disappeared over the cliff. The tiger, evidently 
alarmed by the screams of the women, vanished as 
mysteriously as it had appeared, and when the women had 
reassembled and recovered from their fright, they went down 
the grassy slope and, looking over the cliff, saw their 
companion lying on a narrow ledge some distance below them. 

The woman said she was badly injured— it was found later that 
she had broken a leg and fractured several ribs— and that she 
could not move. Ways and means of a rescue were discussed, 
and it was finally decided that it was a job for men; and as no 
one appeared to be willing to remain at the spot, they informed 
the injured woman that they were going back to the village for 
help. The woman begged not to be left alone, however, and at 
her entreaty a girl, sixteen years of age, volunteered to stay 
with her. So, while the rest of the party set off for the village, 
the girl made her way down to the right, where a rift in the cliff 
enabled her to get a foothold on the ledge. 

This ledge only extended half-way across the face of the cliff 
and ended, a few yards from where the woman was lying, in a 
shallow depression. Fearing that she might fall off the ledge 
and be killed on the rocks hundreds of feet below the woman 
asked the girl to move her to this depression, and this difficult 



and dangerous feat the girl successfully accomplished. There 
was only room for one in the depression, so that the girl 
squatted, as only an Indian can squat, on the ledge facing the 
woman. 

The village was four miles away, and once, and once again, the 
two on the ledge speculated as to the length of time it would 
take their companions to get back to the village; what men they 
were likely to find in the village at that time of day; how long it 
would take to explain what had happened, and finally, how long 
it would take the rescue party to arrive. 

Conversation had been carried on in whispers for fear the tiger 
might be lurking in the vicinity and hear them and then, 
suddenly, the woman gave a gasp and the girl, seeing the look 
of horror on her face and the direction in which she was 
looking, turned her head and over her shoulder saw the tiger, 
stepping out of the rift in the cliff onto the ledge. 

Few of us, I imagine, have escaped that worst of all nightmares 
in which, while our limbs and vocal cords are paralysed with 
fear, some terrible beast in monstrous form approaches to 
destroy us; the nightmare from which, sweating fear in every 
pore, we waken with a cry of thankfulness to Heaven that it 
was only a dream. There was no such happy awakening from 
the nightmare of that unfortunate girl, and little imagination is 
needed to picture the scene. A rock cliff with a narrow ledge 
running partly across it and ending in a little depression in 
which an injured woman is lying; a young girl frozen with 
terror squatting on the ledge, and a tiger slowly creeping 
towards her; retreat in every direction cut off, and no help at 
hand. 

Mothi Singh, an old friend of mine, was in the village visiting a 
sick daughter when the women arrived, and he headed the 
rescue party. When this party went down the grassy slope and 
looked over the cliff, they saw the woman lying in a swoon, and 
on the ledge they saw splashes of blood. 



The injured woman was carried back to the village, and when 
she had been revived and had told her story, Mothi Singh set 
out on his eighteen-mile walk to me. He was an old man well 
over sixty, but he scouted the suggestion that he was tired and 
needed a rest, so we set off together to make investigations. 

But there was nothing that I could do, for twenty-four hours 
had elapsed and all that the tiger had left of the brave young 
girl, who had volunteered to stay with her injured companion, 
were a few bits of bone and her torn and blood-stained clothes. 

This was the first human being killed by the tiger which later 
received recognition in Government records as 'The Mohan 
Man-eater'. 

After killing the girl, the tiger went down the Kosi valley for the 
winter, killing on its way— among other people— two men of 
the Public Works Department, and the daughter-in-law of our 
member of the Legislative Council. As summer approached it 
returned to the scene of its first kill, and for several years 
thereafter its beat extended up and down the Kosi valley from 
Kakrighat to Gargia— a distance of roughly forty miles— until 
it finally took up its quarters on the hill above Mohan, in the 
vicinity of a village called Kartkanoula. 

At the District Conference, to which reference has been made 
in a previous story, the three man-eating tigers operating at 
that time in the Kumaon Division were classed as follows in 
their order of importance: — 

1st— Chowgarh, Naini Tal District. 

2nd— Mohan, Almora District. 

3rd— Kanda, Garhwal District. 

After the Chowgarh tiger had been accounted for I was 
reminded by Baines, Deputy Commissioner, Almora, that only a 
part of my promise made at the conference had been fulfilled, 
and that the Mohan tiger was next on the list. The tiger, he 
stated, was becoming more active and a greater menace every 



day, and had during the previous week killed three human 
beings, residents of Kartkanoula village. It was to this village 
Baines now suggested I should go. 

While I had been engaged with the Chowgarh tiger, Baines had 
persuaded some sportsmen to go to Kartkanoula, but though 
they had sat up over human and animal kills they had failed to 
make contact with the man-eater and had returned to their 
depot at Ranikhet. Baines informed me I should now have the 
ground to myself— a very necessary precaution, for nerves 
wear thin when hunting man-eaters, and accidents are apt to 
result when two or more parties are hunting the same animal. 

II 

It was on a blistering hot day in May that I, my two servants, 
and the six Garhwalis I had brought with me from Naini Tal 
alighted from the 1 p.m. train at Ramnagar and set off on our 
twenty-four-mile foot journey to Kartkanoula. Our first stage 
was only seven miles, but it was evening before we arrived at 
Gargia. I had left home in a hurry on receiving Baines' letter, 
and had not had time to ask for permission to occupy the 
Gargia Forest Bungalow, so I slept out in the open. 

On the far side of the Kosi river at Gargia there is a cliff several 
hundred feet high, and while I was trying to get sleep I heard 
what I thought were stones falling off the cliff on the rocks 
below. The sound was exactly the same as would be made by 
bringing two stones violently together. After some time this 
sound worried me, as sounds will on a hot night, and as the 
moon was up and the light good enough to avoid stepping on 
snakes, I left my camp bed and set out to make investigations. I 
found that the sound was being made by a colony of frogs in a 
marsh by the side of the road. I have heard land-, water- and 
tree-frogs making strange sounds in different parts of the 
world, but I have never heard anything so strange as the sound 
made by the frogs at Gargia in the month of May. 

After a very early start next morning we did the twelve miles to 
Mohan before the sun got hot, and while my men were cooking 


their food and my servants were preparing my breakfast, the 
chowkidar of the bungalow, two Forest Guards, and several 
men from the Mohan bazaar, entertained me with stories of the 
man-eater, the most recent of which concerned the exploits of a 
fisherman who had been fishing the Kosi river. One of the 
Forest Guards claimed to be the proud hero of this exploit, and 
he described very graphically how he had been out one day 
with the fisherman and, on turning a bend in the river, they had 
come face to face with the man-eater; and how the fisherman 
had thrown away his rod and had grabbed the rifle off his— the 
Forest Guard's— shoulder; and how they had run for their lives 
with the tiger close on their heels. 'Did you look back? 1 I asked. 
'No, sahib/ said he, pitying my ignorance. 'How could a man 
who was running for his life from a man-eater look back?'; and 
how the fisherman, who was leading by a head, in a thick patch 
of grass had fallen over a sleeping bear, after which there had 
been great confusion and shouting and everyone, including the 
bear, had run in different directions and the fisherman had got 
lost; and how after a long time the fisherman had eventually 
found his way back to the bungalow and had said a lot to him— 
the Forest Guard— on the subject of having run away with his 
rifle and left him emptyhanded to deal with a man-eating tiger 
and an angry bear. The Forest Guard ended up his recital by 
saying that the fisherman had left Mohan the following day 
saying that he had hurt his leg when he fell over the bear, and 
that anyway there were no fish to be caught in the Kosi river. 

By midday we were ready to continue our journey, and, with 
many warnings from the small crowd that had collected to see 
us off to keep a sharp lookout for the man-eater while going 
through the dense forest that lay ahead of us, we set out on our 
four-thousand-foot climb to Kartkanoula. 

Our progress was slow, for my men were carrying heavy loads 
and the track was excessively steep, and the heat terrific. 

There had been some trouble in the upper villages a short time 
previously, necessitating the dispatch from Naini Tal of a small 
police force, and I had been advised to take everything I 



needed for myself and my men with me, as owing to the 
unsettled conditions it would not be possible to get any stores 
locally This was the reason for the heavy loads my men were 
carrying. 

After many halts we reached the edge of the cultivated land in 
the late afternoon, and as there was now no further danger to 
be apprehended for my men from the man-eater, I left them 
and set out alone for the Foresters' Hut which is visible from 
Mohan, and which had been pointed out to me by the Forest 
Guards as the best place for my stay while at Kartkanoula. 

The hut is on the ridge of the high hill overlooking Mohan, and 
as I approached it along the level stretch of road running 
across the face of the hill, in turning a corner in a ravine where 
there is some dense undergrowth, I came on a woman filling an 
earthenware pitcher from a little trickle of water flowing down 
a wooden trough. Apprehending that my approach on rubber- 
soled shoes would frighten her, I coughed to attract her 
attention, noticed that she started violently as I did so, and a 
few yards beyond her, stopped to light a cigarette. A minute or 
two later I asked, without turning my head, if it was safe for 
anyone to be in this lonely spot, and after a little hesitation the 
woman answered that it was not safe, but that water had to be 
fetched and as there was no one in the home to accompany her, 
she had come alone. Was there no man? Yes, there was a man, 
but he was in the fields ploughing, and in any case it was the 
duty of women to fetch water. How long would it take to fill the 
pitcher? Only a little longer. The woman had got over her fright 
and shyness, and I was now subjected to a close cross- 
examination. Was I a policeman? No. Was I a Forest Officer? 

No, Then who was I? Just a man. Why had I come? To try and 
help the people of Kartkanoula. In what way? By shooting the 
man-eater. Where had I heard about the man-eater? Why had I 
come alone? Where were my men? How many were there? How 
long would I stay? And so on. 

The pitcher was not declared full until the woman had satisfied 



her curiosity, and as she walked behind me she pointed to one 
of several ridges running down the south face of the hill, and 
pointing out a big tree growing on a grassy slope said that 
three days previously the man-eater had killed a woman under 
it; this tree I noted, with interest, was only two or three 
hundred yards from my objective— the Foresters' Hut. We had 
now come to a footpath running up the hill, and as she took it 
the woman said the village from which she had come was just 
round the shoulder of the hill, and added that she was now 
quite safe. 

Those of you who know the women of India will realize that I 
had accomplished a lot, especially when it is remembered that 
there had recently been trouble in this area with the police. So 
far from alarming the woman and thereby earning the hostility 
of the entire countryside I had, by standing by while she filled 
her pitcher and answering a few questions, gained a friend who 
would in the shortest time possible acquaint the whole 
population of the village of my arrival; that I was not an officer 
of any kind, and that the sole purpose of my visit was to try to 
rid them of the man-eater. 

Ill 

The Foresters' Hut was on a little knoll some twenty yards to 
the left of the road, and as the door was only fastened with a 
chain I opened it and walked inside. The room was about ten 
feet square and quite clean, but had a mouldy disused smell; I 
learnt later that the hut had not been occupied since the 
advent of the man-eater in that area eighteen months 
previously. On either side of the main room there were two 
narrow slips of rooms, one used as a kitchen, and the other as a 
fuel store. The hut would make a nice safe shelter for my men, 
and having opened the back door to let a current of air blow 
through the room, I went outside and selected a spot between 
the hut and the road for my 40-lb. tent. There was no furniture 
of any kind in the hut, so I sat down on a rock near the road to 
await the arrival of my men. 



The ridge at this point was about fifty yards wide, and as the 
hut was on the south edge of the ridge, and the village on the 
north face of the hill, the latter was not visible from the former. 
I had been sitting on the rock for about ten minutes when a 
head appeared over the crest from the direction of the village, 
followed by a second and a third. My friend the watercarrier 
had not been slow in informing the village of my arrival. 

When strangers meet in India and wish to glean information on 
any particular subject from each other, it is customary to 
refrain from broaching the subject that has brought them 
together— whether accidentally or of set purpose— until the 
very last moment, and to fill up the interval by finding out 
everything concerning each other's domestic and private 
affairs; as for instance, whether married and if so the number 
and sex of children and their ages; if not married, why not; 
occupation and amount of pay, and so on. Questions that would 
in any other part of the world earn one a thick ear are in India 
— and especially in our hills— asked so artlessly and 
universally that no one who has lived among the people dreams 
of taking offence at them. 

In my conversation with the woman I had answered many of 
the set questions, and the ones of a domestic nature which it is 
not permissible for a woman to ask of a man were being put to 
me when my men arrived. They had filled a kettle at the little 
spring, and in an incredibly short time dry sticks were 
collected, a fire lit, the kettle boiled, and tea and biscuits 
produced. As I opened a tin of condensed milk I heard the men 
asking my servants why condensed milk was being used 
instead of fresh milk and receiving the answer that there was 
no fresh milk; and further that, as it had been apprehended 
that owing to some previous trouble in this area no fresh milk 
would be available, a large supply of tinned milk had been 
brought. The men appeared to be very distressed on hearing 
this and after a whispered conversation one of them, who I 
learnt later was the Headman of Kartkanoula, addressed me 
and said it was an insult to them to have brought tinned milk. 



when all the resources of the village were at my disposal. I 
admitted my mistake, which I said was due to my being a 
stranger to that locality and told the Headman that if he had 
any milk to spare I would gladly purchase a small quantity for 
my daily requirements, but that beyond the milk, I wanted for 
nothing. 

My loads had now been unstrapped, while more men had 
arrived from the village, and when I told my servants where I 
wanted them to pitch my tent there was a horrified exclamation 
from the assembled villagers. Live in a tent— indeed! Was I 
ignorant of the fact that there was a man-eating tiger in this 
area and that it used this road regularly every night? If I 
doubted their word, let me come and see the claw marks on the 
doors of the houses where the road ran through the upper end 
of the village. Moreover, if the tiger did not eat me in the tent it 
would certainly eat my men in the hut, if I was not there to 
protect them. This last statement made my men prick up their 
ears and add their entreaties to the advice of the villagers, so 
eventually I agreed to stay in the main room, while my two 
servants occupied the kitchen, and the six Garhwalis the fuel 
store. 

The subject of the man-eater having been introduced, it was 
now possible for me to pursue it without admitting that it was 
the one object I had wished to introduce from the moment the 
first man had put his head over the ridge. The path leading 
down to the tree where the tiger had claimed its last victim was 
pointed out to me, and the time of day, and the circumstances 
tinder which the woman had been killed, explained. The road 
along which the tiger came every night, I was informed, ran 
eastward to Baital Ghat with a branch down to Mohan, and 
westward to Chaknakl on the Ramganga river. The road going 
west, after running through the upper part of the village and 
through cultivated land for half a mile, turned south along the 
face of the hill, and on rejoining the ridge on whigh the hut 
was, followed the ridge right down to Chaknakl. This portion of 
the road between Kartkanoula and Chaknakl, some six miles 



long, was considered to be very dangerous, and had not been 
used since the advent of the man-eater; I subsequently found 
that after leaving the cultivated land the road entered dense 
tree and scrub jungle, which extended right down to the river. 

The main cultivation of Kartkanoula village is on the north face 
of the hill, and beyond this cultivated land there are several 
small ridges with deep ravines between. On the nearest of 
these ridges, and distant about a thousand yards from the 
Foresters' Hut, there is a big pine tree. Near this tree, some 
ten days previously, the tiger had killed, partly eaten and left, a 
woman, and as the three sportsmen who were staying in a 
Forest Bungalow four miles away were unable to climb the pine 
tree the villagers had put up three machans in three separate 
trees, at distances varying from one hundred to one hundred 
and fifty yards from the kill, and the machans had been 
occupied by the sportsmen and their servants a little before 
sunset. There was a young moon at the time, and after it had 
set the villagers heard a number of shots being fired, and when 
they questioned the servants next morning the servants said 
they did not know what had been fired at for they themselves 
had not seen anything. 

Two days later a cow had been killed over which the sportsmen 
had sat, and again; as on the previous occasion, shots had been 
fired after the moon had set. It is these admittedly sporting but 
unsuccessful attempts to bag man-eaters that makes them so 
wary, and the more difficult to shoot the longer they live. 

The villagers gave me one very interesting item of news in 
connexion with the tiger. They said they always knew when it 
had come into the village by the low moaning sound it made. 

On questioning them closely I learnt that at times the sound 
was continuous as the tiger passed between the houses, while 
at other times the sound stopped for sometimes short, and 
other times long periods. 

From this information I concluded (a) that the tiger was 
suffering from a wound, (b) that the wound was of such a 



nature that the tiger only felt it when in motion, and that 
therefore, (c) the wound was in one of its legs. I was assured 
that the tiger had not been wounded by any local shikari, or by 
any of the sportsmen from Ranikhet who had sat up for it; 
however, this was of little importance, for the tiger had been a 
man-eater for years, and the wound that I believed it was 
suffering from might have been the original cause of its 
becoming a man-eater. A very interesting point and one that 
could only be cleared up by examining the tiger— after it was 
dead. 

The men were curious to know why I was so interested in the 
sound made by the tiger, and when I told them that it indicated 
the animal had a wound in one of its legs and that the wound 
had been caused either by a bullet, or porcupine quills, they 
disagreed with my reasoning and said that on the occasions 
they had seen the tiger it appeared to be in sound condition, 
and further, that the ease with which it killed and carried off its 
victims was proof that it was not crippled in any way. However, 
what I told them was remembered and later earned me the 
reputation of being gifted with second sight. 

IV 

When passing through Ramnagar I had asked the Tahsildar to 
purchase two young male buffaloes for me and to send them to 
Mohan, where my men would take them over. 

I told the villagers I intended tying up one of the buffaloes near 
the tree where three days previously the woman had been 
killed and the other on the road to Chaknakl, and they said they 
could think of no better sites, but that they would talk the 
matter over among themselves, and let me know in the 
morning if they had any other suggestions to make. Night was 
now drawing in, and before leaving the Headman promised to 
send word to all the adjoining villages in the morning to let 
them know of my arrival, the reason for my coming, and to 
impress on them the urgency of letting me know without loss of 
time of any kills, or attacks by the tiger in their areas. 


The musty smell in the room had much decreased though it 
was still noticeable. However, I paid no attention to it, and after 
a bath and dinner put two stones against the doors— there 
being no other way of keeping them shut— and being bone- 
tired after my day's exertions went to bed and to sleep. I am a 
light sleeper, and two or three hours later I awoke on hearing 
an animal moving about in the jungle. It came right up to the 
back door. Getting hold of a rifle and a torch, I moved the stone 
aside with my foot and heard an animal moving off as I opened 
the door— it might from the sound it was making have been the 
tiger, but it might also have been a leopard or a porcupine. 
However, the jungle was too thick for me to see what it was. 
Back in the room and with the stone once more in position, I 
noticed I had developed a sore throat, which I attributed to 
having sat in the wind after the hot walk up from Mohan; but 
when my servant pushed the door open and brought in my 
early-morning cup of tea, I found I was suffering from an attack 
of laryngitis, due possibly to my having slept in a long-disused 
hut, the roof of which was swarming with bats. 

My servant informed me that he and his companion had 
escaped infection, but that the six Garhwalis in the fuel store 
were all suffering from the same complaint as I was. My stock 
of medicine consisted of a two-ounce bottle of iodine and a few 
tablets of quinine, and on rummaging in my gun-case I found a 
small paper packet of permanganate which my sister had 
provided for me on a previous occasion. The packet was soaked 
through with gun oil, but the crystals were still soluble, and I 
put a liberal quantity of the crystals into a tin of hot water, 
together with some iodine. The resulting gargle was very 
potent, and while it blackened our teeth it did much to relieve 
the soreness in our throats. 

After an early breakfast I sent four men down to Mohan to 
bring up the two buffaloes, and myself set off to prospect the 
ground where the woman had been killed. From the directions 
I had received overnight I had no difficulty in finding the spot 
where the tiger had attacked and killed the woman, as she was 



tying the grass she had cut into a bundle. The grass, and the 
rope she was using, were lying just as they had been left, as 
were also two bundles of grass left by her companions when 
they had run off in fright to the village. The men had told me 
that the body of the woman had not been found, but from the 
fact that three perfectly good lengths of rope and the dead 
woman's sickle had been left in the jungle, I am inclined to 
think that no attempt had been made to find her. 

The woman had been killed at the upper end of a small 
landslide, and the tiger had taken her down the slide and into a 
thick patch of undergrowth. Here the tiger had waited, possibly 
to give the two women time to get out of sight, and had then 
crossed the ridge visible from the hut, after which it had gone 
with its kill straight down the hill for a mile or more into dense 
tree and scrub jungle. The tracks were now four days old, and 
as there was nothing to be gained by following them further, I 
turned back to the hut. 

The climb back to the ridge was a very steep one, and when I 
reached the hut at about midday I found an array of pots and 
pans of various shapes and sizes on the verandah, all 
containing milk. In contrast to the famine of the day before 
there was now abundance, sufficient milk in fact for me to have 
bathed in. My servants informed me they had protested to no 
effect and that each man had said, as he deposited his vessel 
on the verandah, that he would take good care that I used no 
more condensed milk while I remained in their midst. 

I did not expect the men to return from Mohan with the 
buffaloes before nightfall, so after lunch I set out to have a look 
at the road to Chaknakl. 

From the hut the hill sloped gradually upwards to a height of 
about five hundred feet, and was roughly triangular in shape. 
The road, after running through cultivated land for half a mile, 
turned sharply to the left, went across a steep rocky hill until it 
regained the ridge, and then turned to the right and followed 
the ridge down to Chaknakl. The road was level for a short 



distance after coming out on the ridge, and then went steeply 
down, the gradient in places being eased by hairpin bends. 

I had the whole afternoon before me, and examined about 
three miles of the road very carefully When a tiger uses a road 
regularly it invariably leaves signs of its passage by making 
scratch marks on the side of the road. These scratch marks, 
made for the same purpose as similar marks made by domestic 
cats and all other members of the cat family, are of very great 
interest to the sportsman, for they provide him with the 
following very useful information, (1) whether the animal that 
has made the mark is a male or a female, (2) the direction in 
which it was travelling, (3) the length of time that has elapsed 
since it passed, (4) the direction and approximate distance of 
its headquarters, (5) the nature of its kills, and finally (6) 
whether the animal has recently had a meal of human flesh. 

The value of this easily-acquired information to one who is 
hunting a man-eater on strange ground will be easily 
understood. Tigers leave their pug marks on the roads they use 
and these pug marks can provide one with quite a lot of useful 
information, as for instance the direction and speed at which 
the animal was travelling, its sex and age, whether all four 
limbs are sound, and if not sound, which particular limb, is 
defective. 

The road I was on had through long disuse got overgrown with 
short stiff grass and was therefore not, except in one or two 
damp places, a good medium on which to leave pug marks. One 
of these damp places was within a few yards of where the road 
came out on the ridge, and just below this spot there was a 
green and very stagnant pool of water; a regular drinking place 
for sambur. 

I found several scratch marks just round the corner where the 
road turned to the left after leaving the cultivated ground, the 
most recent of which was three days old. Two hundred yards 
from these scratch marks the road, for a third of its width, ran 
under an overhanging rock. This rock was ten feet high and at 



the top of it there was a flat piece of ground two or three yards 
wide, which was only visible from the road when approaching 
the rock from the village side. On the ridge I found more 
scratch marks, but I did not find any pug marks until I got to 
the first hairpin bend. Here, in cutting across the bend, the 
tiger had left its tracks where it had jumped down onto some 
soft earth. The tracks, which were a day old, were a little 
distorted, but even so it was possible to see that they had been 
made by a big, old, male tiger. 

When one is moving in an area in which a man-eating tiger is 
operating progress is of necessity very slow, for every 
obstruction in one's line of walk, be it a bush, a tree, rock, or 
an inequality in the ground capable of concealing death, has to 
be cautiously approached, while at the same time, if a wind is 
not blowing— and there was no wind that evening— a careful 
and constant lookout has to be maintained behind and on 
either side. Further, there was much of interest to be looked at, 
for it was the month of May, when orchids at this elevation— 
4,000 to 5,000 feet— are at their best, and I have never seen a 
greater variety or a greater wealth of bloom than the forests on 
that hill had to show. The beautiful white butterfly orchid was 
in greatest profusion, and every second tree of any size 
appeared to have decked itself out with them. 

It was here that I first saw a bird that Prater of the Bombay 
Natural History Society later very kindly identified for me as 
the Mountain Crag Martin, a bird of a uniform ash colour, with 
a slight tinge of pink on its breast, and in size a little smaller 
than a Rosy Pastor. These birds had their broods with them, 
and while the young ones— four to a brood— sat in a row on a 
dry twig at the top of a high tree, the parent birds kept darting 
away— often to a distance of two or three hundred yards— to 
catch insects. The speed at which they flew was amazing, and I 
am quite sure there is nothing in feathers in North India, not 
excluding our winter visitor the great Tibetan Swallow, that 
these Martins could not make rings round. Another thing about 
these birds that was very interesting was their wonderful 



eyesight. On occasions they would fly in a dead straight line for 
several hundred yards before turning and coming back. It was 
not possible, at the speed they were going, that they were 
chasing insects on these long flights, and as after each flight 
the bird invariably thrust some minute object into one of the 
gaping mouths, I believe they were able to see insects at a 
range at which they would not have been visible to the human 
eye through the most powerful field-glasses. 

Safeguarding my neck, looking out for tracks, enjoying nature 
generally, and listening to all the jungle sounds— a sambur a 
mile away down the hillside in the direction of Mohan was 
warning the jungle folk of the presence of a tiger, and a kakar 
and a langur (Entellus monkey) on the road to Chaknakl were 
warning other jungle folk of the presence of a leopard— time 
passed quickly, and I found myself back at the overhanging 
rock as the sun was setting. As I approached this rock I marked 
it as being quite the most dangerous spot in all the ground I 
had so far gone over. A tiger lying on the grass-covered bit of 
ground above the rock would only have to wait until anyone 
going either up or down the road was under or had passed it to 
have them at his mercy— a very dangerous spot indeed, and 
one that needed remembering. 

When I got back to the hut I found the two buffaloes had 
arrived, but it was too late to do anything with them that 
evening. 

My servants had kept a fire going most of the day in the hut, 
the air of which was now sweet and clean, but even so I was 
not going to risk sleeping in a closed room again; so I made 
them cut two thorn bushes and wedge them firmly into the 
doorways before going to bed. There was no movement in the 
jungle near the back door that night, and after a sound sleep I 
woke in the morning with my throat very much better. 

I spent most of the morning talking to the village people and 
listening to the tales they had to tell of the man-eater and the 
attempts that had been made to shoot it, and after lunch I tied 



up one buffalo on the small ridge the tiger had crossed when 
carrying away the woman, and the other at the hairpin bed 
where I had seen the pug marks. 

Next morning I found both buffaloes sleeping peacefully after 
having eaten most of the big feed of grass I had provided them 
with. I had tied bells round the necks of both animals, and the 
absence of any sound from these bells as I approached each 
buffalo gave me two disappointments for, as I have said, I found 
both of them asleep. That evening I changed the position of the 
second buffalo from the hairpin bend to where the road came 
out on the ridge, close to the pool of stagnant water. 

The methods most generally employed in tiger shooting can 
briefly be described as (a) sitting up, and (b) beating, and 
young male buffaloes are used as bait in both cases. The 
procedure followed is to select the area most convenient for a 
sit-up, or for a beat, and to tie the bait out in the late evening 
using a rope which the bait cannot, but which the tiger can, 
break; and when the bait is taken to either sit up over the kill 
on a machan in a tree, or beat the cover into which the kill has 
been taken. 

In the present case neither of these methods was feasible. My 
throat, though very much better, was still sore and it would not 
have been possible for me to have sat up for any length of time 
without coughing, and a beat over that vast area of heavily 
wooded and broken ground would have been hopeless even if I 
had been able to muster a thousand men, so I decided to stalk 
the tiger, and to this end carefully sited my two buffaloes and 
tied them to stout saplings with four one-inch-thick hemp 
ropes, and left them out in the jungle for the whole twenty-four 
hours. 

I now stalked the buffaloes in turn each morning as soon as 
there was sufficient light to shoot by, and again in the evening, 
for tigers, be they man-eaters or not, kill as readily in the day 
as they do at night in areas in which they are not disturbed, 
and during the day, while I waited for news from outlying 



villages, nursed my throat, and rested, my six Garhwalis fed 
and watered the buffaloes. 

On the fourth evening when I was returning at sunset after 
visiting the buffalo on the ridge, as I came round a bend in the 
road thirty yards from the overhanging rock, I suddenly, and 
for the first time since my arrival at Kartkanoula, felt I was in 
danger, and that the danger that threatened me was on the 
rock in front of me. For five minutes I stood perfectly still with 
my eyes fixed on the upper edge of the rock, watching for 
movement. At that short range the flicker of an eyelid would 
have caught my eyes, but there was not even this small 
movement; and after going forward ten paces, I again stood 
watching for several minutes. The fact that I had seen no 
movement did not in any way reassure me— the man-eater was 
on the rock, of that I was sure; and the question was, what was 
I going to do about it? The hill, as I have already told you, was 
very steep, had great rocks jutting out of it, and was overgrown 
with long grass and tree and scrub jungle. Bad as the going 
was, had it been earlier in the day I would have gone back and 
worked round and above the tiger to try to get a shot at him, 
but with only half an hour of daylight left, and the best part of a 
mile still to go, it would have been madness to have left the 
road. So, slipping up the safety-catch and putting the rifle to 
my shoulder, I started to pass the rock. 

The road here was about eight feet wide, and going to the 
extreme outer edge I started walking crab-fashion, feeling each 
step with my feet before putting my weight down to keep from 
stepping off into space. Progress was slow and difficult, but as I 
drew level with the overhanging rock and then began to pass it, 
hope rose high that the tiger would remain where he was until 
I reached that part of the road from which the flat bit of ground 
above the rock, on which he was lying, was visible. The tiger, 
however, having failed to catch me off my guard was taking no 
chances, and I had just got clear of the rock when I heard a low 
muttered growl above me, and a little later first a kakar went 
off barking to the right, and then two hind sambur started 



belling near the crest of the triangular hill. 

The tiger had got away with a sound skin, but for the matter of 
that, so had I, so there was no occasion for regrets, and from 
the place on the hill where the sambur said he was, I felt sure 
he would hear the bell I had hung round the neck of the buffalo 
that was tied on the ridge near the stagnant pool. 

When I reached the cultivated land I found a group of men 
waiting for me. They had heard the kakar and sambur and were 
very disappointed that I had not seen the tiger, but cheered up 
when I told them I had great hopes for the morrow. 

V 

During the night a dust-storm came on, followed by heavy rain, 
and I found to my discomfort that the roof of the hut was very 
porous. However, I eventually found a spot where it was 
leaking less than in others, dragged my camp bed to it and 
continued my sleep. It was a brilliantly clear morning when I 
awoke; the rain had washed the heat haze and dust out of the 
atmosphere, and every leaf and blade of grass was glistering in 
the newly risen sun. 

Hitherto I had visited the nearer buffalo first, but this morning 
I had an urge to reverse the daily procedure, and after 
instructing my men to wait until the sun was well up and then 
go to feed and water the nearer buffalo, I set off with high 
hopes down the Chaknakl road; having first cleaned and oiled 
my 450/400 rifle— a very efficient weapon, and a good and 
faithful friend of many years' standing. 

The overhanging rock that I passed with such trouble the 
previous evening did not give me a moment's uneasiness now, 
and after passing it I started looking for tracks, for the rain had 
softened the surface of the road. I saw nothing however until I 
came to the damp place on the road, which, as I have said, was 
on the near side of the ridge and close to the pool where the 
buffalo was tied. Here in the soft earth I found the pug marks 
of the tiger, made before the storm had come on, and going in 


the direction of the ridge. Close to this spot there is a rock 
about three feet high, on the khud side of the road. On the 
previous occasions that I had stalked down the road I had 
found that by standing on this rock I could look over a hump in 
the road and see the buffalo where it was tied forty yards away. 
When I now climbed on to the rock and slowly raised my head, 

I found that the buffalo had gone. This discovery was as 
disconcerting as it was inexplicable. To prevent the tiger from 
carrying the buffalo away to some distant part of the jungle, 
where the only method of getting a shot would have been by 
sitting up on the ground or in a tree— a hopeless proceeding 
with my throat in the condition it was in— I had used four 
thicknesses of strong one-inch-thick hemp rope, and even so 
the tiger had got away with the kill. 

I was wearing the thinnest of rubber-soled shoes, and very 
silently I approached the sapling to which the buffalo had been 
tied and examined the ground. The buffalo had been killed 
before the storm, but had been carried away after the rain had 
stopped, without any portion of it having been eaten. Three of 
the ropes I had twisted together had been gnawed through, 
and the fourth had been broken. Tigers do not usually gnaw 
through ropes; however, this one had done so, and had carried 
off the kill down the hill facing Mohan. My plans had been 
badly upset, but very fortunately the rain had come to my 
assistance. The thick carpet of dead leaves which the day 
before had been as dry as tinder were now wet and pliable, and 
provided I made no mistakes, the pains the tiger had been to in 
getting away with the kill might yet prove his undoing. 

When entering a jungle in which rapid shooting might at any 
moment become necessary, I never feel happy until I have 
reassured myself that my rifle is loaded. To pull a trigger in an 
emergency and wake up in the Happy Hunting Grounds— or 
elsewhere— because one had omitted to load a weapon, would 
be one of those acts of carelessness for which no excuse could 
be found; so though I knew I had loaded my rifle before I came 
to the overhanging rock, I now opened it and extracted the 



cartridges. I changed one that was discoloured and dented, and 
after moving the safety-catch up and down several times to 
make sure it was working smoothly— I have never carried a 
cocked weapon— I set off to follow the drag. 

This word 'drag', when it is used to describe the mark left on 
the ground by a tiger when it is moving its kill from one place 
to another, is misleading, for a tiger when taking its kill any 
distance (I have seen a tiger carry a full-grown cow for four 
miles) does not drag it, it carries it; and if the kill is too heavy 
to be carried, it is left. The drag is distinct or faint according to 
the size of the animal that is being carried, and the manner in 
which it is being held. For instance, assuming the kill is a 
sambur and the tiger is holding it by the neck the hind quarters 
will trail on the ground leaving a distinct drag mark. On the 
other hand, if the sambur is being held by the middle of the 
back, there may be a faint drag mark, or there may be none at 
all. 

In the present case the tiger was carrying the buffalo by the 
neck, and the hind quarters trailing on the ground were leaving 
a drag mark it was easy to follow. For a hundred yards the tiger 
went diagonally across the face of the hill until he came to a 
steep clay bank. In attempting to cross this bank he had slipped 
and relinquished his hold of the kill, which had rolled down the 
hill for thirty or forty yards until it had fetched up against a 
tree. On recovering the kill the tiger picked it up by the back, 
and from now on only one leg occasionally touched the ground, 
leaving a faint drag mark, which nevertheless, owing to the 
hillside being carpeted with bracken, was not very difficult to 
follow. In his fall the tiger had lost direction, and he now 
appeared to be undecided where to take the kill. First he went 
a couple of hundred yards to the right, then a hundred yards 
straight down the hill through a dense patch of ringals (stunted 
bamboo). After forcing his way with considerable difficulty 
through the ringals he turned to the left and went diagonally 
across the hill for a few hundred yards until he came to a great 
rock, to the right of which he skirted. This rock was flush with 



the ground on the approach side, and, rising gently for twenty 
feet, appeared to project out over a hollow or dell of 
considerable extent. If there was a cave or recess under the 
projection, it would be a very likely place for the tiger to have 
taken his kill to, so leaving the drag I stepped on to the rock 
and moved forward very slowly, examining every yard of 
ground below, and on either side of me, as it came into view. On 
reaching the end of the projection and looking over I was 
disappointed to find that the hill came up steeply to meet the 
rock, and that there was no cave or recess under it as I had 
expected there would be. 

As the point of the rock offered a good view of the dell and of 
the surrounding jungle— and was comparatively safe from an 
attack from the man-eater— I sat down; and as I did so, I 
caught sight of a red and white object in a dense patch of short 
undergrowth, forty or fifty yards directly below me. When one 
is looking for a tiger in heavy jungle everything red that 
catches the eye is immediately taken for the tiger, and here, 
not only could I see the red of the tiger, but I could also see his 
stripes. For a long minute I watched the object intently, and 
then, as the face you are told to look for in a freak picture 
suddenly resolves itself, I saw that the object I was looking at 
was the kill, and not the tiger; the red was blood where he had 
recently been eating, and the stripes were the ribs from which 
he had torn away the skin. I was thankful for having held my 
fire for that long minute, for in a somewhat similar case a 
friend of mine ruined his chance of bagging a very fine tiger by 
putting two bullets into a kill over which he had intended 
sitting; fortunately he was a good shot, and the two men whom 
he had sent out in advance to find the kill and put up a machan 
over it, and who were, at the time he fired, standing near the 
kill screened by a bush, escaped injury. 

When a tiger that has not been disturbed leaves his kill out in 
the open, it can be assumed that he is lying up close at hand to 
guard the kill from vultures and other scavengers, and the fact 
that I could not see the tiger did not mean that he was not lying 



somewhere close by in the dense undergrowth. 

Tigers are troubled by flies and do not lie long in one position, 
so I decided to remain where I was and watch for movement; 
but hardly had I come to this decision, when I felt an irritation 
in my throat. I had not quite recovered from my attack of 
laryngitis and the irritation grew rapidly worse until it became 
imperative for me to cough. The usual methods one employs on 
these occasions, whether in church or the jungle, such as 
holding the breath and swallowing hard, gave no relief until it 
became a case of cough, or burst; and in desperation I tried to 
relieve my throat by giving the alarm-call of the langur. Sounds 
are difficult to translate into words and for those of you who 
are not acquainted with our jungles I would try to describe this 
alarm-call, which can be heard for half a mile, as khok, khok, 
khok, repeated again and again at short intervals, and ending 
up with khokorror. All langurs do not call at tigers, but the ones 
in our hills certainly do, and as this tiger had probably heard 
the call every day of his life it was the one sound I could make 
to which he would not pay the slightest attention. My rendering 
of the call in this emergency did not sound very convincing, but 
it had the desired effect of removing the irritation from my 
throat. 

For half an hour thereafter I continued to sit on the rock, 
watching for movement and listening for news from the jungle 
folk, and when I had satisfied myself that the tiger was not 
anywhere within my range of vision, I got off the rock, and, 
moving with the utmost caution, went down to the kill. 

VI 

I regret I am not able to tell you what weight of flesh a full- 
grown tiger can consume at a meal, but you will have some 
idea of his capacity when I tell you he can eat a sambur in two 
days, and a buffalo in three, leaving possibly a small snack for 
the fourth day. 

The buffalo I had tied up was not full-grown but he was by no 
means a small animal, and the tiger had eaten approximately 


half of him. With a meal of that dimension inside of him I felt 
sure he had not gone far, and as the ground was still wet, and 
would remain so for another hour or two, I decided to find out 
in what direction he had gone, and if possible, stalk him. 

There was a confusion of tracks near the kill but by going 
round in widening circles I found the track the tiger had made 
when leaving. Soft-footed animals are a little more difficult to 
track than hard-footed ones, yet after long years of experience 
tracking needs as little effort as a gun dog exerts when 
following a scent. As silently and as slowly as a shadow I took 
up the track, knowing that the tiger would be close at hand. 
When I had gone a hundred yards I came on a flat bit of 
ground, twenty feet square, and carpeted with that variety of 
short soft grass that has highly scented roots; on this grass the 
tiger had lain, the imprint of his body being clearly visible. 

As I was looking at the imprint and guessing at the size of the 
animal that had made it, I saw some of the blades of grass that 
had been crushed down, spring erect. This indicated that the 
tiger had been gone only a minute or so. 

You will have some idea of the lay-out when I tell you that the 
tiger had brought the kill down from the north, and on leaving 
it had gone west, and that the rock on which I had sat, the kill, 
and the spot where I was now standing, formed the points of a 
triangle, one side of which was forty yards, and the other two 
sides a hundred yards long. 

My first thought on seeing the grass spring erect was that the 
tiger had seen me and moved off, but this I soon found was not 
likely, for neither the rock nor the kill was visible from the 
grass plot, and that he had not seen me and moved after I had 
taken up his track I was quite certain. Why then had he left his 
comfortable bed and gone away? The sun shining on the back 
of my neck provided the answer. It was now nine o'clock of an 
unpleasantly hot May morning, and a glance at the sun and the 
tree-tops over which it had come showed that it had been 
shining on the grass for ten minutes. The tiger had evidently 



found it too hot, and gone away a few minutes before my 
arrival to look for a shady spot. 

I have told you that the grass plot was twenty feet square. On 
the far side to that from which I had approached there was a 
fallen tree, lying north and south. This tree was about four feet 
in diameter, and as it was lying along the edge of the grass plot 
in the middle of which I was standing, it was ten feet away 
from me. The root end of the tree was resting on the hillside, 
which here went up steeply and was overgrown with 
brushwood, and the branch end (which had been snapped off 
when the tree had fallen) was projecting out over the hillside. 
Beyond the tree the hill appeared to be more or less 
perpendicular, and running across the face of it was a narrow 
ledge of rock, which disappeared into dense jungle thirty yards 
further on. 

If my surmise, that the sun had been the cause of the tiger 
changing his position, was correct, there was no more suitable 
place than the lee of the tree for him to have taken shelter in, 
and the only way of satisfying myself on this point was, to walk 
up to the tree— and look over. Here a picture seen long years 
ago in Punch flashed into memory. The picture was of a lone 
sportsman who had gone out to hunt lions and who on glancing 
up, on to the rock he was passing, looked straight into the 
grinning face of the most enormous lion in Africa. Underneath 
the picture was written, 'When you go out looking for a lion, be 
quite sure that you want to see him 1 . True, there would be this 
small difference, that whereas my friend in Africa looked up— 
into the lion's face, I would look down— into the tiger's; 
otherwise the two cases— assuming that the tiger was on the 
far side of the tree— would be very similar. 

Slipping my feet forward an inch at a time on the soft grass, I 
now started to approach the tree, and had covered about half 
the distance that separated me from it when I caught sight of a 
black-and-yellow object about three inches long on the rocky 
ledge, which I now saw was a well-used game path. For a long 



minute I stared at this motionless object, until I was convinced 
that it was the tip of the tiger's tail. If the tail was pointing 
away from me the head must obviously be towards me, and as 
the ledge was only some two feet wide, the tiger could only be 
crouching down and waiting to spring the moment my head 
appeared over the bole of the tree. The tip of the tail was 
twenty feet from me, and allowing eight feet for the tiger's 
length while crouching, his head would be twelve feet away 
But I should have to approach much nearer before I should be 
able to see enough of his body to get in a crippling shot, and a 
crippling shot it would have to be if I wanted to leave on my 
feet. And now, for the first time in my life, I regretted my habit 
of carrying an uncocked rifle. The safety-catch of my 450/400 
makes a very distinct click when thrown off, and to make any 
sound now would either bring the tiger right on top of me, or 
send him straight down the steep hillside without any 
possibility of my getting in a shot. 

Inch by inch I again started to creep forward, until the whole of 
the tail, and after it the hind quarters, came into view. When I 
saw the hind quarters, I could have shouted with delight, for 
they showed that the tiger was not crouching and ready to 
spring, but was lying down. As there was only room for his 
body on the two-foot-wide ledge, he had stretched his hind legs 
out and was resting them on the upper branches of an oak 
sapling growing up the face of the almost perpendicular 
hillside. Another foot forward and his belly came into view, and 
from the regular way in which it was heaving up and down I 
knew that he was asleep. Less slowly now I moved forward, 
until his shoulder, and then his whole length, was exposed to 
my view. The back of his head was resting on the edge of the 
grass plot, which extended for three or four feet beyond the 
fallen tree; his eyes were fast shut, and his nose was pointing 
to heaven. 

Aligning the sights of the rifle on his forehead I pressed the 
trigger and, while maintaining a steady pressure on it, pushed 
up the safety-catch. I had no idea how this reversal of the usual 



method of discharging a rifle would work, but it did work; and 
when the heavy bullet at that short range crashed into his 
forehead not so much as a quiver went through his body His 
tail remained stretched straight out; his hind legs continued to 
rest on the upper branches of the sapling; and his nose still 
pointed to heaven. Nor did his position change in the slightest 
when I sent a second, and quite unnecessary, bullet to follow 
the first. The only change noticeable was that his stomach had 
stopped heaving up and down, and that blood was trickling 
down his forehead from two surprisingly small holes. 

I do not know how the close proximity of a tiger reacts on 
others, but me it always leaves with a breathless feeling— due 
possibly as much to fear as to excitement— and a desire for a 
little rest. I sat down on the fallen tree and lit the cigarette I 
had denied myself from the day my throat had got bad, and 
allowed my thoughts to wander. Any task well accomplished 
gives satisfaction, and the one just completed was no 
exception. The reason for my presence at that spot was the 
destruction of the man-eater, and from the time I had left the 
road two hours previously right up to the moment I pushed up 
the safety-catch everything— including the langur call— had 
worked smoothly and without a single fault. In this there was 
great satisfaction, the kind of satisfaction I imagine an author 
must feel when he writes FINIS to the plot that, stage by stage, 
has unfolded itself just as he desired it to. In my case, however, 
the finish had not been satisfactory, for I had killed the animal, 
that was lying five feet from me, in his sleep. 

My personal feelings in the matter are I know of little interest 
to others, but it occurs to me that possibly you also might think 
it was not cricket, and in that case I should like to put the 
arguments before you that I used on myself, in the hope that 
you will find them more satisfactory than I did. These 
arguments were (a) The tiger was a man-eater that was better 
dead than alive, (b) therefore it made no difference whether he 
was awake or asleep when killed, and (c) that had I walked 
away when I saw his belly heaving up and down I should have 



been morally responsible for the deaths of all the human beings 
he killed thereafter. All good and sound arguments, you will 
admit, for my having acted as I did; but the regret remains that 
through fear of the consequences to myself, or fear of losing 
the only chance I might ever get, or possibly a combination of 
the two, I did not awaken the sleeping animal and give him a 
sporting chance. 

The tiger was dead, and if my trophy was to be saved from 
falling into the valley below and ruined, it was advisable to get 
him off the ledge with as little delay as possible. Leaning the 
rifle, for which I had no further use, against the fallen tree, I 
climbed up to the road and, once round the corner near the 
cultivated land, I cupped my hands and sent a cooee echoing 
over the hills and valleys. I had no occasion to repeat the call, 
for my men had heard my two shots when returning from 
attending to the first buffalo and had run back to the hut to 
collect as many villagers as were within calling distance. Now, 
on hearing my cooee, the whole crowd came helter-skelter 
down the road to meet me. 

When stout ropes and an axe had been procured I took the 
crowd back with me, and after I had secured the ropes round 
the tiger, willing hands half carried and half dragged him off 
the ledge and over the fallen tree, on to the plot of grass. Here 
I would have skinned him, but the villagers begged me not to 
do so, saying that the women and children of Kartkanoula and 
the adjoining villages would be very disappointed if they were 
not given an opportunity of seeing the tiger with their own eyes 
and satisfying themselves that the man-eater, in fear of whom 
they had lived for so many years, and who had established a 
reign of terror over the whole district, was really and truly 
dead. 

While a couple of saplings to assist in carrying the tiger back to 
the hut were being felled, I saw some of the men passing their 
hands over the tiger's limbs, and knew they were satisfying 
themselves that their assertion that the tiger had not been 



suffering from any old, or crippling, wounds was correct. At the 
hut the tiger was placed in the shade of a wide-spreading tree 
and the villagers informed that it was at their disposal up to 
two o'clock— longer I could not give them, for it was a very hot 
day and there was fear of the hair slipping, and the skin being 
ruined. 

I myself had not looked closely at the tiger, but at 2 p.m., when 
I laid him on his back to start the skinning, I noticed that most 
of the hair from the inner side of his left foreleg was missing, 
and that there were a number of small punctures in the skin, 
from which yellow fluid was exuding. I did not draw attention 
to these punctures, and left the skinning of the leg, which was 
considerably thinner than the right leg, to the last. When the 
skin had been removed from the rest of the animal, I made a 
long cut from the chest to the pad of the festering left leg, and 
as I removed the skin, drew out of the flesh, one after another, 
porcupine quills which the men standing round eagerly seized 
as souvenirs; the longest of these quills was about five inches, 
and their total number was between twenty-five and thirty. The 
flesh under the skin, from the tiger's chest to the pad of his 
foot, was soapy, and of a dark yellow colour; cause enough to 
have made the poor beast moan when he walked, and quite 
sufficient reason for his having become— and having remained 
— a man-eater, for porcupine quills do not dissolve no matter 
how long they are embedded in flesh. 

I have extracted, possibly, a couple of hundred porcupine quills 
from the man-eating tigers I have shot. Many of these quills 
have been over nine inches in length and as thick as pencils. 
The majority were embedded in hard muscles, a few were 
wedged firmly between bones, and all were broken off short 
under the skin. 

Unquestionably the tigers acquired the quills when killing 
porcupines for food, but the question arises— to which I regret 
I am unable to give any satisfactory answer— why animals with 
the intelligence, and the agility, of tigers, should have been so 



careless as to drive quills deep into themselves, or be so slow 
in their movements as to permit porcupines— whose only 
method of defending themselves is by walking backwards— to 
do so; and further, why the quills should have been broken off 
short, for porcupine quills are not brittle. 

Leopards are just as partial to porcupines as our hill tigers are, 
but they do not get quills stuck in them, for they kill porcupines 
— as I have seen— by catching them by the head; and why 
tigers do not employ the same safe and obvious method of 
killing as leopards employ, and so avoid injury to themselves is 
a mystery to me. 

And now I have done telling you the story of the second of the 
three man-eating tigers mentioned at that District Conference 
of long ago and, when opportunity offers, I will tell you how the 
third tiger, the Kanda man-eater, died. 



The Fish of My Dreams 

FISHING for mahseer in a well-stocked submontane river is, in 
my opinion, the most fascinating of all field sports. Our 
environments, even though we may not be continuously 
conscious of them, nevertheless play a very important part in 
the sum total of our enjoyment of any form of outdoor sport. I 
am convinced that the killing of the fish of one's dreams in 
uncongenial surroundings would afford an angler as little 
pleasure as the winning of the Davis Cup would to a tennis 
player if the contest were staged in the Sahara. 

The river I have recently been fishing in flows, for some forty 
miles of its length, through a beautifully wooded valley, well 
stocked with game and teeming with bird life. I had the 
curiosity to count the various kinds of animals and birds seen in 
one day, and by the evening of that day my count showed, 
among animals, sambur, chital, kakar, ghooral, pig, langur and 
red monkeys; and among birds seventy-five varieties including 
peafowl, red jungle fowl, kaleege pheasants, black partridge 
and bush quail. 

In addition to these I saw a school of five otter in the river, 
several small mugger and a python. The python was lying on 
the surface of a big still pool, with only the top of its flat head 
and eyes projecting above the gin-clear water. The subject was 
one I had long wished to photograph, and in order to do this it 
was necessary to cross the river above the pool and climb the 
opposite hillside; but unfortunately I had been seen by those 
projecting eyes, and as I cautiously stepped backwards, the 
reptile, which appeared to be about eighteen feet long, 
submerged, to retire to its subterranean home among the piled- 
up boulders at the head of the pool. 

In some places the valley through which the river flows is so 
narrow that a stone can be tossed with ease from one side to 
the other, and in other places it widens out to a mile or more. 

In these open spaces grow amaltas with their two-feet-long 
sprays of golden bloom, karaunda and box bushes with their 



white star-shaped flowers. The combined scent from these 
flowers fills the air, throbbing with the spring songs of a 
multitude of birds, with the most delicate and pleasing of 
perfumes. In these surroundings angling for mahseer might 
well be described as sport fit for kings. My object in visiting 
this sportsman's paradise was not, however, to kill mahseer, 
but to try to secure a daylight picture of a tiger, and it was only 
when light conditions were unfavourable that I laid aside my 
movie camera for a rod. 

I had been out from dawn one day, trying, hour after hour, to 
get a picture of a tigress and her two cubs. The tigress was a 
young animal, nervous as all young mothers are, and as often 
as I stalked her she retired with the cubs into heavy cover. 
There is a limit to the disturbance a tigress, be she young or 
old, will suffer when accompanied by cubs, and when the limit 
on this occasion had been reached I altered my tactics and 
tried sitting up in trees over open glades, and lying in high 
grass near a stagnant pool in which she and her family were 
accustomed to drink, but with no better success. 

When the declining sun was beginning to cast shadows over 
the open places I was watching, I gave up the attempt, and 
added the day to the several hundred days I had already spent 
in trying to get a picture of a tiger in its natural surroundings. 
The two men I had brought from camp had passed the day in 
the shade of a tree on the far side of the river. I instructed them 
to return to camp by way of the forest track, and, exchanging 
my camera for a rod, set off along the river, intent on catching 
a fish for my dinner. 

The fashion in rods and tackle has altered, in recent years, as 
much as the fashion in ladies' dress. Gone, one often wonders 
where, are the 18-foot greenheart rods with their unbreakable 
accompaniments, and gone the muscles to wield them, and 
their place has been taken by light one-handed fly rods. 

I was armed with an 11-foot tournament trout rod, a reel 
containing 50 yards of casting line and 200 yards of fine silk 



backing, a medium gut cast, and a one-inch home-made brass 
spoon. 

When one has unlimited undisturbed water to fish one is apt to 
be over-critical. A pool is discarded because the approach to it 
is over rough ground, or a run is rejected because of a 
suspected snag. On this occasion, half a mile had been 
traversed before a final selection was made: a welter of white 
water cascading over rocks at the head of a deep oily run 80 
yards long, and at the end of the run a deep still pool 200 yards 
long and 70 yards wide. Here was the place to catch the fish 
for my dinner. 

Standing just clear of the white water I flicked the spoon into 
the run, pulling a few yards of line off the reel as I did so, and 
as I raised the rod to allow the line to run through the rings the 
spoon was taken by a fish, near the bank, and close to where I 
was standing. By great good luck the remaining portion of the 
slack line tightened on the drum of the reel and did not foul the 
butt of the rod or handle of the reel, as so often happens. 

In a flash the fish was off downstream, the good well-oiled reel 
singing a paean of joy as the line was stripped off it. The 50 
yards of casting line followed by 100 yards of backing were 
gone, leaving in their passage burned furrows in the fingers of 
my left hand, when all at once the mad rush ceased as abruptly 
as it had begun, and the line went dead. 

The speculations one makes on these occasions chased each 
other through my mind, accompanied by a little strong 
language to ease my feelings. The hold had been good without 
question. The cast, made up a few days previously from short 
lengths of gut procured from the Pilot Gut Coy., had been 
carefully tied and tested. Suspicion centred on the split ring: 
possibly, cracked on a stone on some previous occasion, it had 
now given way. 

Sixty yards of the line are back on the reel, when the slack line 
is seen to curve to the left, and a moment later is cutting a 



strong furrow upstream— the fish is still on, and is heading for 
the white water. Established here, pulling alternately from 
upstream, at right angles, and downstream fails to dislodge 
him. Time drags on, and the conviction grows that the fish has 
gone, leaving the line hung up on a snag. Once again and just 
as hope is being abandoned the line goes slack, and then 
tightens a moment later, as the fish for the second time goes 
madly downstream. 

And now he appears to have made up his mind to leave this 
reach of the river for the rapids below the pool. In one strong 
steady run he reaches the tail of the pool. Here, where the 
water fans out and shallows, he hesitates, and finally returns to 
the pool. A little later he shows on the surface for the first time, 
and but for the fact that the taut line runs direct from the point 
of the rod to the indistinctly seen object on the far side of the 
pool, it would be impossible to believe that the owner of that 
great triangular fin, projecting five inches out of the water, had 
taken a fly spoon a yard or two from my feet. 

Back in the depths of the pool, he was drawn inch by inch into 
slack water. To land a big fish single-handed on a trout rod is 
not an easy accomplishment. Four times he was stranded with 
a portion of his great shoulders out of water, and four times at 
my very cautious approach he lashed out, and, returning to the 
pool, had to be fought back inch by inch. At the fifth attempt, 
with the butt of the rod held at the crook of my thumb and 
reversed, rings upwards to avoid the handle of the reel coming 
into contact with him, he permits me to place one hand and 
then the other against his sides and very gently propel him 
through the shallow water up on to dry land. 

A fish I had set out to catch, and a fish I had caught, but he 
would take no part in my dinner that night, for between me and 
camp lay three and a half miles of rough ground, half of which 
would have to be covered in the dark. 

When sending away my 11-lb. camera I had retained the cotton 
cord I use for drawing it up after me when I sit in trees. One 



end of this cord was passed through the gills of the fish and out 
at his mouth, and securely tied in a loop. The other end was 
made fast to the branch of a tree. When the cord was paid out 
the fish lay snugly against a great slab of rock, in 
comparatively still water. Otter were the only danger, and to 
scare them off I made a flag of my handkerchief, and fixed the 
end of the improvised flagstaff in the bed of the river a little 
below the fish. 

The sun was gilding the mountain tops next morning when I 
was back at the pool, and found the fish lying just where I had 
left it the previous evening. Having unfastened the cord from 
the branch, I wound it round my hand as I descended the slab 
of rock towards the fish. Alarmed at my approach, or feeling 
the vibration of the cord, the fish suddenly galvanized into life, 
and with a mighty splash dashed upstream. Caught at a 
disadvantage, I had no time to brace my feet on the sloping and 
slippery rock, but was jerked headlong into the pool. 

I have a great distaste for going over my depth in these 
submontane rivers, for the thought of being encircled by a 
hungry python is very repugnant to me, and I am glad there 
were no witnesses to the manner in which I floundered out of 
that pool. I had just scrambled out on the far side, with the fish 
still attached to my right hand, when the men I had instructed 
to follow me arrived. Handing the fish over to them to take 
down to our camp on the bank of the river, I went on ahead to 
change and get my camera ready. 

I had no means of weighing the fish and at a rough guess both 
the men and I put it at 50 lb. 

The weight of the fish is immaterial, for weights are soon 
forgotten. Not so forgotten are the surroundings in which the 
sport is indulged in. The steel blue of the fern-fringed pool 
where the water rests a little before cascading over rock and 
shingle to draw breath again in another pool more beautiful 
than the one just left— the flash of the gaily-coloured kingfisher 
as he breaks the surface of the water, shedding a shower of 



diamonds from his wings as he rises with a chirp of delight, a 
silver minnow held firmly in his vermilion bill— the belling of 
the sambur and the clear tuneful call of the chital apprising the 
jungle folk that the tiger, whose pug marks show wet on the 
sand where a few minutes before he crossed the river, is out in 
search of his dinner. These are things that will not be forgotten 
and will live in my memory, the lodestone to draw me back to 
that beautiful valley, as yet unspoiled by the hand of man. 



The Kanda Man-Eater 

HOWEVER little faith we have in the superstitions we share 
with others— thirteen at a table, the passing of wine at dinner, 
walking under a ladder, and so on— our own private 
superstitions, though a source of amusement to our friends, are 
very real to us. 

I do not know if sportsmen are more superstitious than the 
rest of mankind, but I do know that they take their 
superstitions very seriously. One of my friends invariably takes 
five cartridges, never more and never less, when he goes out 
after big game, and another as invariably takes seven 
cartridges. Another, who incidentally was the best-known big- 
game sportsman in Northern India, never started the winter 
shooting season without first killing a mahseer. My own private 
superstition concerns snakes. When after man-eaters I have a 
deep rooted conviction that, however much I may try, all my 
efforts will be unavailing until I have first killed a snake. 

During the hottest days of one May I had from dawn to dark 
climbed innumerable miles up and down incredibly steep hills, 
and through thick thorn bushes that had left my hands and 
knees a mass of ugly scratches, in search of a very wary man- 
eater. I returned on that fifteenth evening, dog-tired, to the 
two-roomed Forest Bungalow I was staying at to find a 
deputation of villagers waiting for me with the very welcome 
news that the man-eater, a tiger, had been seen that day on the 
outskirts of their village. It was too late to do anything that 
night, so the deputation were provided with lanterns and sent 
home with strict injunctions that no one was to leave the 
village the following day. 

The village was situated at the extreme end of the ridge on 
which the bungalow was, and because of its isolated position 
and the thick forest that surrounded it, had suffered more from 
the depredations of the tiger than any other village in the 
district. The most recent victims were two women and a man. 



I had made one complete circle of the village the following 
morning and had done the greater part of a second circle, a 
quarter of a mile below the first, when after negotiating a 
difficult scree of shale I came on a little nullah made by the 
rush of rain-water down the steep hillside. A glance up and 
down the nullah satisfied me that the tiger was not in it, and 
then a movement just in front of me, and about twenty-five feet 
away, caught my eye. At this spot there was a small pool of 
water the size of a bath-tub, and on the far side of it was a 
snake that had evidently been drinking. The lifting of the 
snake's head had caught my eye and it was not until the head 
had been raised some two or three feet from the ground and 
the hood expanded that I realized it was a hamadryad. It was 
the most beautiful snake I had ever seen. The throat, as it faced 
me, was a deep orange red shading to golden yellow where the 
body met the ground. The back, olive green, was banded by 
ivory-coloured chevrons, and some four feet of its length from 
the tip of its tail upwards was shiny black, with white chevrons. 
In length the snake was between thirteen and fourteen feet. 

One hears many tales about hamadryads, their aggressiveness 
when disturbed, and the speed at which they can travel. If, as it 
seemed about to do, the snake attacked, up or down hill I 
should be at a disadvantage, but across the shale scree I felt 
that I could hold my own. A shot at the expanded hood, the size 
of a small plate, would have ended the tension, but the rifle in 
my hands was a heavy one and I had no intention of disturbing 
the tiger that had showed up after so many days of weary 
waiting and toil. After an interminably long minute, during 
which time the only movement was the flicking in and out of a 
long and quivering forked tongue, the snake closed his hood, 
lowered his head to the ground and, turning, made off up the 
opposite slope. Without taking my eyes off him I groped with 
my hand on the hillside and picked up a stone that filled my 
hand as comfortably as a cricket ball. The snake had just 
reached a sharp ridge of hard clay when the stone, launched 
with the utmost energy I was capable of, struck it on the back 



of the head. The blow would have killed any other snake 
outright but the only and very alarming, effect it had on the 
hamadryad was to make it whip round and come straight 
towards me. A second and a larger stone fortunately caught it 
on the neck when it had covered half the distance between us, 
and after that the rest was easy. With a great feeling of 
satisfaction I completed the second circle round the village, 
and though it proved as fruitless as the first, I was elated at 
having killed the snake. Now, for the first time in many days, I 
had a feeling that my search for the man-eater would be 
successful. 

The following day I again searched the forest surrounding the 
village, and towards evening found the fresh pug marks of the 
tiger at the edge of a ploughed field overlooking the village. 

The occupants of the village, numbering about a hundred, were 
by now thoroughly alarmed, and leaving them with the 
assurance that I would return early next day I set out on my 
lonely four-mile walk back to the Forest Bungalow. 

To walk with safety through forests or along deserted roads in 
an area in which a man-eater is operating calls for the utmost 
caution and the strict observance of many rules. It is only when 
the hunter has repeatedly been the hunted that the senses can 
be attuned to the required pitch, and those rules be strictly 
adhered to, the breaking of which would provide the man-eater 
with an easy victim. 

The reader may ask, 'Why a lonely walk? 1 , when I probably had 
men and to spare with me in camp. My answer to this very 
natural question would be: first, because one is apt to get 
careless and rely too much on one's companions, and second, 
because in a mix-up with a tiger one has a better chance when 
one is alone. 

The next morning, as I approached the village, I saw an eager 
throng of men waiting for me, and when within earshot I was 
greeted with the gratifying news that a buffalo had been killed 
during the night. The animal had been killed in the village, and 



after being dragged some distance along the ridge had been 
taken down into a narrow, deep, and very heavily wooded 
valley on the north face of the hill. 

A very careful reconnaissance from a projecting rock on the 
ridge satisfied me that an approach down the steep hill, along 
the line of the drag, would not be advisable, and that the only 
thing to do was to make a wide detour, enter the valley from 
the lower end and work up to the spot where I expected to find 
the kill. 

This manoeuvre was successfully accomplished, and by midday 
I had arrived at the spot— marked from above— where the 
valley flattened out for a hundred yards before going straight 
up three hundred yards to the ridge above. It was at the upper 
end of this flat bit of ground that I expected to find the kill, and 
with luck, the tiger. The long and difficult climb up the valley 
through dense thickets of thorn bush and stunted bamboo had 
brought out a bath of sweat, and as it was not advisable to take 
on a job where quick firing might be necessary with sweaty 
hands, I sat down for a much-needed rest and for a smoke. 

The ground in front of me was strewn with large smooth 
boulders among which a tiny stream meandered, forming 
wherever possible small crystal-clear pools. Shod with the 
thinnest of rubber-soled shoes, the going over these boulders 
was ideal for my purpose, and when I had cooled and dried I 
set off to stalk the kill in the hope of finding the tiger lying 
asleep near it. When three-quarters of the ground had been 
covered I caught sight of the kill tucked away under a bank of 
ferns, and about twenty-five yards away from where the hill 
went steeply up to the ridge. The tiger was not in sight, and, 
very cautiously drawing level with the kill I took up my position 
on a flat boulder to scan every inch of ground visible. 

The premonition of impending danger is too well known and 
established a fact to need any comment. For three or four 
minutes I had stood perfectly still with no thought of danger 
and then all at once I became aware that the tiger was looking 



at me at a very short range. The same sense that had conveyed 
the feeling of impending danger to me had evidently operated 
in the same way on the tiger and awakened him from his sleep. 
To my left front were some dense bushes, growing on a bit of 
flat ground. On these bushes, distant fifteen to twenty feet from 
me, and about the same distance from the kill, my interest 
centred. Presently the bushes were gently stirred and the next 
second I caught sight of the tiger going at full speed up the 
steep hillside. Before I could get the rifle to bear on him he 
disappeared behind a creeper-covered tree, and it was not until 
he had covered about sixty yards that I again saw him, as he 
was springing up the face of a rock. At my shot he fell 
backwards and came roaring down the hill, bringing an 
avalanche of stones with him. A broken back, I concluded; and 
just as I was wondering how best to deal with him when he 
should arrive all-of-a-heap at my feet, the roaring ceased, and 
the next minute, as much to my relief as to my disappointment, 

I saw him going fullout, and apparently unwounded, across the 
side of the hill. The momentary glimpses I caught of him 
offered no shot worth taking, and with a crash through some 
dry bamboos he disappeared round the shoulder of the hill into 
the next valley. 

I subsequently found that my bullet, fired at an angle of 
seventy-five degrees, had hit the tiger on the left elbow and 
chipped out a section from that bone which some cynical 
humourist has named the 'funny bone'. Carrying on, the bullet 
had struck the rock and, splashing back, had delivered a 
smashing blow on the point of the jaw. Neither wound, however 
painful it may have been, was fatal, and the only result of my 
following up the very light blood trail into the next valley was 
to be growled at from a dense thorn thicket, to enter which 
would have been suicidal. 

My shot had been heard in the village and an expectant crowd 
were waiting for me on the ridge. They were even more 
disappointed, if that were possible, than I was at the failure of 
my carefully planned and as carefully executed stalk. 



On visiting the kill the following morning I was very pleased 
and not a little surprised to find that the tiger had returned to 
it during the night and taken a light meal. The only way now of 
getting a second shot was to sit up over the kill; and here a 
difficulty presented itself. There were no suitable trees within 
convenient distance of the kill, and the very unpleasant 
experience I had had on a former occasion had effectively 
cured me of sitting at night on the ground for a man-eater. 
While still undecided where to sit I heard the tiger call, some 
distance down the valley up which I had climbed the previous 
day. The calling of the tiger offered me a very welcome chance 
of shooting it in the most pleasant way it is possible of bringing 
one of these animals to bag. The conditions under which a tiger 
can be called up are (a) when rampaging through the forest in 
search of a mate, and (b) when lightly wounded. It goes without 
saying that the sportsman must be able to call sufficiently well 
to deceive the tiger, and that the call must come from a spot to 
which the tiger will quite naturally come— a dense thicket, or a 
patch of heavy grass— and that the sportsman must be 
prepared to take his shot at a very close range. I am quite 
certain that many sportsmen will be sceptical of the statement 
I have made that a lightly wounded tiger will come to a call. I 
would ask all such to reserve their judgement until they have 
tried to experiment for themselves. On the present occasion, 
however, though the tiger answered me, call for call, for 
upwards of an hour, he refused to come any nearer, and I 
attributed my failure to the fact that I was calling from the spot 
where the previous day the tiger had met with an unfortunate 
experience. 

The tree I finally selected was growing on the very edge of a 
perpendicular bank and had a convenient branch about eight 
feet from the ground. When sitting on this branch I should be 
thirty feet from, and directly above, the boulder-strewn ravine 
up which I expected the tiger to come. The question of the tree 
settled, I returned to the ridge where I had instructed my men 
to meet me with breakfast. 



By four o'clock in the evening I was comfortably seated on the 
branch and prepared for a long and a hard sit-up. Before 
leaving my men I had instructed them to cooee to me from the 
ridge at sunrise next morning. If I answered with the call of a 
leopard they were to sit tight, but if they received no answer, 
they were to form two parties with as many villagers as they 
could collect and come down on either side of the valley, 
shouting and throwing stones. 

I have acquired the habit of sleeping in any position on a tree, 
and as I was tired the evening did not pass unpleasantly. As the 
setting sun was gilding the hilltops above me I was roused to 
full consciousness by the alarm-call of a langur. I soon located 
the monkey, sitting in a tree-top on the far side of the valley, 
and as it was looking in my direction I concluded it had 
mistaken me for a leopard. The alarm-call was repeated at 
short intervals, and finally ceased as darkness came on. 

Hour after hour I strained my eyes and ears, and was suddenly 
startled by a stone rolling down the hillside and striking my 
tree. The stone was followed by the stealthy padding of a heavy, 
soft-footed animal, unmistakably the tiger. At first I comforted 
myself with the thought that his coming in this direction, 
instead of up the valley, was accidental, but this thought was 
soon dispelled when he started to emit low deep growls from 
immediately behind me. Quite evidently he had come into the 
valley while I was having breakfast, and, taking up a position 
on the hill, where the monkey had later seen him, had watched 
me climbing into the tree. Here was a situation I had not 
counted on and one that needed careful handling. The branch 
that had provided a comfortable seat while daylight lasted, 
admitted of little change of position in the dark. I could, of 
course, have fired off my rifle into the air, but the terrible 
results I have seen following an attempt to drive away a tiger 
at very close quarters by discharging a gun dissuaded me from 
taking this action. Further, even if the tiger had not attacked, 
the discharge of the rifle (a 450/400) so near him would 
probably have made him leave the locality and all my toil would 



have gone for nothing. 

I knew the tiger would not spring for that would have carried 
him straight down a drop of thirty feet on to the rocks below. 
But there was no need for him to spring, for by standing on his 
hind legs he could easily reach me. Lifting the rifle off my lap 
and reversing it, I pushed the barrel between my left arm and 
side, depressing the muzzle and slipping up the safety-catch as 
I did so. This movement was greeted by a deeper growl than 
any that had preceded it. If the tiger now reached up for me he 
would in all probability come in contact with the rifle, round 
the triggers, of which my fingers were crooked, and even if I 
failed to kill him the confusion following on my shot would give 
me a sporting cha nee of climbing higher into the tree. Time 
dragged by on leaden feet, and, eventually, tiring of prowling 
about the hillside and growling, the tiger sprang across a little 
ravine on my left and a few minutes later I heard the welcome 
sound of a bone being cracked at the kill. At last I was able to 
relax in my uncomfortable position and the only sounds I heard 
for the rest of the night came from the direction of the kill. 

The sun had been up but a few minutes and the valley was still 
in deep shadow when my men cooeed from the ridge, and 
almost immediately afterwards I caught sight of the tiger 
making off at a fast canter up, and across, the hill on my left. In 
the uncertain light and with my nightlong-strained eyes the 
shot was a very difficult one, but I took it, and had the 
satisfaction of seeing the bullet going home. Turning with a 
great roar, he came straight for my tree, and as he was in the 
act of springing the second bullet, with great good fortune, 
crashed into his chest. Diverted in his spring by the impact of 
the heavy bullet, the tiger struck the tree just short of me, and 
ricochetting off it went headlong into the valley below, where 
his fall was broken by one of the small pools already alluded to. 
He floundered out of the water, leaving it dyed red with his 
blood, and went lumbering down the valley and out of sight. 

Fifteen hours on the hard branch had cramped every muscle in 



my body and it was not until I had swarmed down the tree, 
staining my clothes in the great gouts of blood the tiger had 
left on it, and had massaged my stiff limbs, that I was able to 
follow him. He had gone but a short distance, and I found him 
lying dead at the foot of a rock in another pool of water. 

Contrary to my orders the men, collected on the ridge, hearing 
my shot and the tiger's roar followed by a second shot, came in 
a body down the hill. Arrived at the bloodstained tree, at the 
foot of which my soft hat was lying, they not unnaturally 
concluded I had been carried off by the tiger. Hearing their 
shouts of alarm I called out to them, and again they came 
running down the valley, only to be brought up with a gasp of 
dismay when they saw my blood-stained clothes. Reassured 
that I was not injured and that the blood on my clothes was not 
mine, a moment later they were crowding round the tiger. A 
stout sapling was soon cut and lashed to him with creepers, 
and the tiger, with -no little difficulty and a great deal of 
shouting, was carried up the steep hill to the village. 

In remote areas in which long-established man-eaters are 
operating, many gallant acts of heroism are performed, which 
the local inhabitants accept as everyday occurrences and the 
outside world have no means of hearing about. I should like to 
put on record one such act concerning the Kanda man-eater's 
last human victim. I arrived on the scene shortly after the 
occurrence, and from details supplied by the villagers and from 
a careful examination of the ground, which had not been 
disturbed in the interval, I am able to present you with a story 
which I believe to be correct in every detail. 

In the village near which I shot the Kanda man-eater lived an 
elderly man and his only son. The father had served in the army 
during the 1914-18 war and it was his ambition to get his son 
enlisted in the Royal Garhwal Rifles— not as simple a job in the 
'piping days of peace', when vacancies were few and applicants 
many, as it is today. Shortly after the lad's eighteenth birthday 
a party of men passed through the village on their way to the 



bazaar at Lansdowne. The lad joined this party and 
immediately on arrival at Lansdowne presented himself at the 
Recruiting Office. As his father had taught him to salute with 
military precision and how to conduct himself in the presence 
of a Recruiting Officer, he was accepted without any hesitation, 
and, after enrolment, was given leave to deposit his few 
personal possessions at home before starting his army training. 

He arrived back home at about midday, after an absence of five 
days, and was told by the friends who thronged round him to 
hear his news that his father was away ploughing their small 
holding at the extreme end of the village and would not return 
before nightfall. (The field that was being ploughed was the 
same one on which I had seen the pug marks of the man-eater 
the day I killed the hamadryad.) 

One of the lad's jobs had been to provide fodder for their cattle, 
and after he had partaken of the midday meal in a neighbour's 
house he set out with a party of twenty men to collect leaves. 

The village, as I have told you, is situated on a ridge, and is 
surrounded by forests. Two women had already been killed by 
the man-eater while cutting grass in these forests, and for 
several months the cattle had been kept alive on leaves cut 
from the trees surrounding the village. Each day the men had 
to go further afield to get their requirements, and on this 
particular day the party of twenty-one, after crossing the 
cultivated land, went for a quarter of a mile down a very steep 
rocky hill to the head of the valley which runs east for eight 
miles, through dense forest, to where it meets the Ramganga 
river opposite the Dhikala Forest Bungalow. 

Went headlong into the valley below: Illustrated by Neville 
Dear from the 1985 Reader Digest book of condensed stories 
Great Stories of Men and the Animal World 

At the head of the valley the ground is more or less flat and 
overgrown with big trees. Here the men separated, each 
climbing into a tree of his choice, and after cutting the quantity 



of leaves required they tied them into bundles with rope 
brought for the purpose, and returned to the village in twos 
and threes. 

Either when the party of men were coming down the hill, 
talking at the tops of their voices to keep up their courage and 
scare away the man-eater, or when they were on the trees 
shouting to each other, the tiger, who was lying up in a dense 
patch of cover half a mile down the valley, heard them. Leaving 
the cover, in which it had four days previously killed and eaten 
a sambur hind, the tiger crossed a stream and by way of a 
cattle track that runs the entire length of the valley hurried up 
in the direction of the men. (The speed at which a tiger has 
travelled over any ground on which he has left signs of his 
passage can be easily determined from the relative position of 
his fore and hind pug marks.) 

The lad of my story had selected a Bauhinea tree from which to 
cut leaves for his cattle. This tree was about twenty yards 
above the cattle track, and the upper branches were leaning 
out over a small ravine in which there were two rocks. From a 
bend in the cattle track the tiger saw the lad on the tree, and 
after lying down and watching him for some time it left the 
track and concealed itself behind a fallen silk cotton tree some 
thirty yards from the ravine. When the lad had cut all the 
leaves he needed he descended from the tree and collected 
them in a heap, preparatory to tying them into a bundle. While 
doing this on the open flat ground he was comparatively safe, 
but unfortunately he had noticed that two of the branches he 
had cut had fallen into the ravine between the two big rocks, 
and he sealed his fate by stepping down into the ravine to 
recover them. As soon as he was out of sight the tiger left the 
shelter of the fallen tree and crept forward to the edge of the 
ravine, and as the lad was stooping down to pick up the 
branches, it sprang on him and killed him. Whether the killing 
took place while the other men were still on the trees, or after 
they had left, it was not possible for me to determine. 



The father of the lad returned to the village at sunset and was 
greeted with the very gratifying news that his son had been 
accepted for the army and that he had returned from 
Lansdowne on short leave. Asking where the lad was, he was 
told that he had gone out earlier in the day to get fodder, and 
surprise was expressed that the father had not found him at 
home. After bedding down the bullocks the father went from 
house to house to find his son. All the men who had been out 
that day were questioned in turn, and all had the same tale to 
tell— that they had separated at the head of the valley, and no 
one could remember having seen the lad after that. 

Crossing the terraced cultivated land the father went to the 
edge of the steep hill, and called, and called again, to his son, 
but received no answer. 

Night was by now setting in. The man returned to his home and 
lit a small smoke-dimmed lantern, and as he passed through 
the village he horrified his neighbours by telling them, in reply 
to their questions, that he was going to look for his son. He was 
asked if he had forgotten the man-eater and answered that it 
was because of the man-eater that he was so anxious to find his 
son, for it was possible he had fallen off a tree and injured 
himself and, for fear of attracting the man-eater, had not 
answered to his call. 

He did not ask anyone to accompany him, and no one offered to 
do so, and for the whole of that night he searched up and down 
that valley in which no one had dared to set foot since the 
advent of the man-eater. Four times during the night— as I saw 
from his foot-prints— when going along the cattle track he had 
passed within ten feet of where the tiger was lying eating his 
son. 

Weary and heartsick he climbed a little way up the rocky hill as 
light was coming, and sat down for a rest. From this raised 
position he could see into the ravine. At sunrise he saw a glint 
of blood on the two big rocks, and hurrying down to the spot he 
found all that the tiger had left of his son. These remains he 



collected and took back to his home, and when a suitable 
shroud had been procured, his friends helped him to carry the 
remains to the burning ghat on the banks of the Mandal river. 

I do not think it would be correct to assume that acts such as 
these are performed by individuals who lack imagination and 
who therefore do not realize the grave risks they run. The 
people of our hills, in addition to being very sensitive to their 
environments, are very superstitious, and every hill-top, valley, 
and gorge is credited with possessing a spirit in one form or 
another, all of the evil and malignant kind most to be feared 
during the hours of darkness. A man brought up in these 
surroundings, and menaced for over a year by a man-eater, 
who, unarmed and alone, from sunset to sunrise, could walk 
through dense forests which his imagination peopled with evil 
spirits, and in which he had every reason to believe a man- 
eater was lurking, was in my opinion possessed of a quality and 
a degree of courage that is given to few. All the more do I give 
him credit for his act of heroism for not being conscious that he 
had done anything unusual, or worthy of notice. When at my 
request he sat down near the man-eater to enable me to take a 
photograph, he looked up at me and said, in a quiet and 
collected voice, 'I am content now, sahib, for you have avenged 
my son. 1 

This was the last of the three man-eaters that I had promised 
the District Officials of Kumaon, and later the people of 
Garhwal, that I would do my best to rid them of. 



The Pipal Pani Tiger 

BEYOND the fact that he was born in a ravine running deep 
into the foot-hills and was one of a family of three, I know 
nothing of his early history. 

He was about a year old when, attracted by the calling of a 
chital hind early one November morning, I found his pug marks 
in the sandy bed of a little stream known locally as Pipal Pani. I 
thought at first that he had strayed from his mother's care, but, 
as week succeeded week and his single tracks showed on the 
game paths of the forest, I came to the conclusion that the near 
approach of the breeding season was an all-sufficient reason 
for his being alone. Jealously guarded one day, protected at the 
cost of the parent life if necessary, and set adrift the next, is the 
lot of all jungle folk; nature's method of preventing inbreeding. 

That winter he lived on peafowl, kakar, small pig and an 
occasional chital hind, making his home in a prostrate giant of 
the forest felled for no apparent reason, and hollowed out by 
time and porcupines. Here he brought most of his kills, 
basking, when the days were cold, on the smooth bole of the 
tree, where many a leopard had basked before him. 

It was not until January was well advanced that I saw the cub 
at close quarters. I was out one evening without any definite 
object in view, when I saw a crow rise from the ground and 
wipe its beak as it lit on the branch of a tree. Crows, vultures 
and magpies always interest me in the jungle, and many are 
the kills I have found both in India and in Africa with the help 
of these birds. On the present occasion the crow led me to the 
scene of an overnight tragedy. A chital had been killed and 
partly eaten and, attracted to the spot probably as I had been, 
a party of men passing along the road, distant some fifty yards, 
had cut up and removed the remains. All that was left of the 
chital were a few splinters of bone and a little congealed blood 
off which the crow had lately made his meal. The absence of 
thick cover and the proximity of the road convinced me that the 
animal responsible for the kill had not witnessed the removal 



and that it would return in due course; so I decided to sit up, 
and made myself as comfortable in a plum tree as the thorns 
permitted. 

I make no apology to you, my reader, if you differ with me on 
the ethics of the much-debated subject of sitting up over kills. 
Some of my most pleasant shikar memories centre round the 
hour or two before sunset that I have spent in a tree over a 
natural kill, ranging from the time when, armed with a muzzle- 
loader whipped round with brass wire to prevent the cracked 
barrel from bursting, I sat over a langur killed by a leopard, to 
a few days ago, when with the most modern rifle across my 
knees, I watched a tigress and her two full-grown cubs eat up 
the sambur stag they had killed, and counted myself no poorer 
for not having secured a trophy. 

True, on the present occasion there is no kill below me, but, for 
the reasons given, that will not affect any chance of a shot; 
scent to interest the jungle folk there is in plenty in the 
bloodsoaked ground, as witness the old grey-whiskered boar 
who has been quietly rooting along for the past ten minutes, 
and who suddenly stiffens to attention as he comes into the line 
of the blood-tainted wind. His snout held high, and worked as 
only a pig can work that member, tells him more than I was 
able to glean from the ground which showed no tracks; his 
method of approach, a short excursion to the right and back 
into the wind, and then a short excursion to the left and again 
back into the wind, each manoeuvre bringing him a few yards 
nearer, indicates the chital was killed by a tiger. Making sure 
once and again that nothing worth eating has been left, he 
finally trots off and disappears from view. 

Two chital, both with horns in velvet, now appear and from the 
fact that they are coming down-wind, and making straight for 
the blood-soaked spot, it is evident they were witnesses to the 
overnight tragedy. Alternately snuffing the ground, or standing 
rigid with every muscle tensed for instant flight, they satisfy 
their curiosity and return the way they came. 



Curiosity is not a human monopoly; many an animal's life is cut 
short by indulging in it. A dog leaves the verandah, to bark at a 
shadow, a deer leaves the herd to investigate a tuft of grass 
that no wind agitated, and the waiting leopard is provided with 
a meal. 

The sun is nearing the winter line when a movement to the 
right front attracts attention. An animal has crossed an opening 
between two bushes at the far end of a wedge of scrub that 
terminates thirty yards from my tree. Presently the bushes at 
my end part, and out into the open, with never a look to right 
or left, steps the cub. Straight up to the spot where his kill had 
been he goes, his look of expectancy giving place to one of 
disappointment as he realizes that his chital, killed, possibly, 
after hours of patient stalking, is gone. The splinters of bone 
and congealed blood are rejected, and his interest centres on a 
tree stump lately used as a butcher's block, to which some 
shreds of flesh are adhering. I was not the only one who carried 
fire-arms in these jungles and, if the cub was to grow into a 
tiger, it was necessary he should be taught the danger of 
carelessly approaching kills in daylight. A scatter-gun and dust- 
shot would have served my purpose better, but the rifle will 
have to do this time; and, as he raises his head to smell the 
stump, my bullet crashes into the hard wood an inch from his 
nose. Only once in the years that followed did the cub forget 
that lesson. 

The following winter I saw him several times. His ears did not 
look so big now and he had changed his baby hair for a coat of 
rich tawny red with well-defined stripes. The hollow tree had 
been given up to its rightful owners a pair of leopards, new 
quarters found in a thick belt of scrub skirting the foot-hills, 
and young sambur added to his menu. 

On my annual descent from the hills next winter, the familiar 
pug marks no longer showed on the game paths and at the 
drinking places, and for several weeks I thought the cub had 
abandoned his old haunts and gone further afield. Then one 



morning his absence was explained for, side by side with his 
tracks, were the smaller and more elongated tracks of the mate 
he had gone to find. I only once saw the tigers, for the cub was 
a tiger now, together. I had been out before dawn to try to bag 
a serow that lived on the foot-hills, and returning along a fire 
track my attention was arrested by a vulture, perched on the 
dead limb of a sal tree. 

The bird had his back towards me and was facing a short 
stretch of scrub with dense jungle beyond. Dew was still heavy 
on the ground, and without a sound I reached the tree and 
peered round. One antler of a dead sambur, for no living deer 
would lie in that position, projected above the low bushes. A 
convenient moss-covered rock afforded my rubbershod feet 
silent and safe hold, and as I drew myself erect, the sambur 
came into full view. The hind quarters had been eaten away 
and, lying on either side of the kill, were the pair, the tiger 
being on the far side with only his hind legs showing. Both 
tigers were asleep. Ten feet straight in front, to avoid a dead 
branch, and thirty feet to the left would give me a shot at the 
tiger's neck, but in planning the stalk I had forgotten the silent 
spectator. Where I stood I was invisible to him, but before the 
ten feet had been covered I came into view and, alarmed at my 
near proximity, he flapped off his perch, omitting as he did so 
to notice a thin creeper dependent from a branch above him 
against which he collided, and came ignominiously to ground. 
The tigress was up and away in an instant, clearing at a bound 
the kill and her mate, the tiger not being slow to follow; a 
possible shot, but too risky with thick jungle ahead where a 
wounded animal would have all the advantages. To those who 
have never tried it, I can recommend the stalking of leopards 
and tigers on their kills as a most pleasant form of sport. Great 
care should however be taken over the shot, for if the animal is 
not killed outright, or anchored, trouble is bound to follow. 

A week later the tiger resumed his bachelor existence. A 
change had now come over his nature. Hitherto he had not 
objected to my visiting his kills but, after his mate left, at the 



first drag I followed up I was given very clearly to understand 
that no liberties would in future be permitted. The angry growl 
of a tiger at close quarters, than which there is no more 
terrifying sound in the jungles, has to be heard to be 
appreciated. 

Early in March the tiger killed his first full-grown buffalo. I was 
near the foot-hills one evening when the agonized bellowing of 
a buffalo, mingled with the angry roar of a tiger, rang through 
the forest. I located the sound as coming from a ravine about 
six hundred yards away. The going was bad, mostly over loose 
rocks and through thorn bushes, and when I crawled up a steep 
bluff commanding a view of the ravine the buffalo's struggles 
were over, and the tiger nowhere to be seen. For an hour I lay 
with finger on trigger without seeing anything of the tiger. At 
dawn next morning I again crawled up the bluff, to find the 
buffalo lying just as I had left her. The soft ground, torn up by 
hoof and claw, testified to the desperate nature of the struggle 
and it was not until the buffalo had been hamstrung that the 
tiger had finally succeeded in pulling her down, in a fight which 
had lasted from ten to fifteen minutes. The tiger's tracks led 
across the ravine and, on following them up, I found a long 
smear of blood on a rock, and, a hundred yards further on, 
another smear on a fallen tree. The wound inflicted by the 
buffalo's horns was in the tiger's head and sufficiently severe to 
make the tiger lose all interest in the kill, for he never returned 
to it. 

Three years later the tiger, disregarding the lesson received 
when a cub (his excuse may have been that it was the close 
season for tigers), incautiously returned to a kill, over which a 
zamindar and some of his tenants were sitting at night, and 
received a bullet in the shoulder which fractured the bone. No 
attempt was made to follow him up, and thirty-six hours later, 
his shoulder covered with a swarm of flies, he limped through 
the compound of the Inspection Bungalow, crossed a bridge 
flanked on the far side by a double row of tenanted houses, the 
occupants of which stood at their doors to watch him pass. 



entered the gate of a walled-in compound and took possession 
of a vacant godown. Twenty-four hours later, possibly alarmed 
by the number of people who had collected from neighbouring 
villages to see him, he left the compound the way he had 
entered it, passed our gate, and made his way to the lower end 
of our village. A bullock belonging to one of our tenants had 
died the previous night and had been dragged into some 
bushes at the edge of the village; this the tiger found, and here 
he remained a few days, quenching his thirst at an irrigation 
furrow. 

When we came down from the hills two months later the tiger 
was living on small animals (calves, sheep, goats, etc.) that he 
was able to catch on the outskirts of the village. By March his 
wound had healed, leaving his right foot turned inwards. 
Returning to the forest where he had been wounded, he levied 
heavy toll on the village cattle, taking, for safety's sake, but one 
meal off each and in this way killing five times as many as he 
would ordinarily have done. The zamindar who had wounded 
him and who had a herd of some four hundred head of cows 
and buffaloes was the chief sufferer. 

In the succeeding years he gained as much in size as in 
reputation, and many were the attempts made by sportsmen, 
and others, to bag him. 

One November evening, a villager, armed with a single-barrel 
muzzle-loading gun, set out to try to bag a pig, selecting for his 
ground machan an isolated bush growing in a twenty-yard-wide 
rowkah (dry watercourse) running down the centre of some 
broken ground. This ground was rectangular, flanked on the 
long sides by cultivated land and on the short sides by a road, 
and by a ten-foot canal that formed the boundary between our 
cultivation and the forest. In front of the man was a four-foot- 
high bank with a cattle track running along the upper edge; 
behind him a patch of dense scrub. At 8 p.m. an animal 
appeared on the track and, taking what aim he could, he fired. 
On receiving the shot the animal fell off the bank, and passed 



within a few feet of the man, grunting as it entered the scrub 
behind. Casting aside his blanket, the man ran to his hut two 
hundred yards away. Neighbours soon collected and, on 
hearing the man's account, came to the conclusion that a pig 
had been hard hit. It would be a pity, they said, to leave the pig 
for hyenas and jackals to eat, so a lantern was lit and as a party 
of six bold spirits set out to retrieve the bag, one of my tenants 
(who declined to join the expedition, and who confessed to me 
later that he had no stomach for looking for wounded pig in 
dense scrub in the dark) suggested that the gun should be 
loaded and taken. 

His suggestion was accepted and, as a liberal charge of powder 
was being rammed home, the wooden ramrod jammed and 
broke inside the barrel. A trivial accident which undoubtedly 
saved the lives of six men. The broken rod was eventually and 
after great trouble extracted, the gun loaded, and the party set 
off. 

Arrived at the spot where the animal had entered the bushes, a 
careful search was made and, on blood being found, every 
effort to find the 'pig' was made; it was not until the whole area 
had been combed out that the quest for that night was finally 
abandoned. Early next morning the search was resumed, with 
the addition of my informant of weak stomach, who was a 
better woodsman than his companions and who, examining the 
ground under a bush where there was a lot of blood, collected 
and brought some blood-stained hairs to me which I recognized 
as tiger's hairs, A brother sportsman was with me for the day 
and together we went to have a look at the ground. 

The reconstruction of jungle events from signs on the ground 
has always held great interest for me. True, one's deductions 
are sometimes wrong, but they are also sometimes right. In the 
present instance I was right in placing the wound in the inner 
forearm of the right foreleg, but was wrong in assuming the leg 
had been broken and that the tiger was a young animal and a 
stranger to the locality. 



There was no blood beyond the point where the hairs had been 
found and, as tracking on the hard ground was impossible, I 
crossed the canal to where the cattle track ran through a bed 
of sand. Here from the pug marks I found that the wounded 
animal was not a young tiger as I had assumed, but my old 
friend the Pipal Pani tiger who, when taking a short cut 
through the village, had in the dark been mistaken for a pig. 

Once before when badly wounded he had passed through the 
settlement without harming man or beast, but he was older 
now, and if driven by pain and hunger might do considerable 
damage. A disconcerting prospect, for the locality was thickly 
populated, and I was due to leave within the week, to keep an 
engagement that could not be put off. 

For three days I searched every bit of the jungle between the 
canal and the foot-hills, an area of about four square miles, 
without finding any trace of the tiger. On the fourth afternoon, 
as I was setting out to continue the search, I met an old woman 
and her son hurriedly leaving the jungle. From them I learnt 
that the tiger was calling near the foot-hills and that all the 
cattle in the jungle had stampeded. When out with a rifle I 
invariably go alone; it is safer in a mix-up, and one can get 
through the jungle more silently. However, I stretched a point 
on this occasion, and let the boy accompany me since he was 
very keen on showing me where he had heard the tiger. 

Arrived at the foot-hills, the boy pointed to a dense bit of cover, 
bounded on the far side by the fire-track to which I have 
already referred, and on the near side by the Pipal Pani stream. 
Running parallel to and about a hundred yards from the stream 
was a shallow depression some twenty feet wide, more or less 
open on my side and fringed with bushes on the side nearer the 
stream. A well-used path crossed the depression at right 
angles. Twenty yards from the path, and on the open side of the 
depression, was a small tree. If the tiger came down the path 
he would in all likelihood stand for a shot on clearing the 
bushes. Here I decided to take my stand and, putting the boy 



into the tree with his feet on a level with my head and 
instructing him to signal with his toes if from his raised 
position he saw the tiger before I did, I put my back to the tree 
and called. 

You, who have spent as many years in the jungle as I have, 
need no description of the call of a tigress in search of a mate, 
and to you less fortunate ones I can only say that the call, to 
acquire which necessitates close observation and the liberal 
use of throat salve, cannot be described in words. 

To my great relief, for I had crawled through the jungle for 
three days with finger on trigger, I was immediately answered 
from a distance of about five hundred yards, and for half an 
hour thereafter— it may have been less and certainly appeared 
more— the call was tossed back and forth. On the one side the 
urgent summons of the king, and on the other, the subdued and 
coaxing answer of his handmaiden. Twice the boy signalled, but 
I had as yet seen nothing of the tiger, and it was not until the 
setting sun was flooding the forest with golden light that he 
suddenly appeared, coming down the path at a fast walk with 
never a pause as he cleared the bushes. When half-way across 
the depression, and just as I was raising the rifle, he turned to 
the right and came straight towards me. 

This manoeuvre, unforeseen when selecting my stand, brought 
him nearer than I had intended he should come and, moreover, 
presented me with a head shot which at that short range I was 
not prepared to take. Resorting to an old device, learned long 
years ago and successfully used on similar occasions, the tiger 
was brought to a stand without being alarmed. With one paw 
poised, he slowly raised his head, exposing as he did so his 
chest and throat. After the impact of the heavy bullet, he 
struggled to his feet and tore blindly through the forest, 
coming down with a crash within a few yards of where, 
attracted by the calling of a chital hind one November morning, 
I had first seen his pug marks. 

It was only then that I found he had been shot under a 



misapprehension, for the wound which I feared might make 
him dangerous proved on examination to be almost healed and 
caused by a pellet of lead having severed a small vein in his 
right forearm. 

Pleasure at having secured a magnificent trophy— he 
measured 10' 3" over curves and his winter coat was in perfect 
condition— was not unmixed with regret, for never again would 
the jungle folk and I listen with held breath to his deep- 
throated call resounding through the foot-hills, and never again 
would his familiar pug marks show on the game paths that he 
and I had trodden for fifteen years. 



The Thak Man-Eater 


I 

PEACE had reigned in the Ladhya valley for many months 
when in September '38 a report was received in Naini Tal that 
a girl, twelve years of age, had been killed by a tiger at Kot 
Kindri village. The report which reached me through Donald 
Stewart of the Forest Department gave no details, and it was 
not until I visited the village some weeks later that I was able 
to get particulars of the tragedy It appeared that, about noon 
one day, this girl was picking up windfalls from a mango tree 
close to and in full view of the village, when a tiger suddenly 
appeared. Before the men working nearby were able to render 
any assistance, it carried her off. No attempt was made to 
follow up the tiger, and as all signs of drag and blood trail had 
been obliterated and washed away long before I arrived on the 
scene, I was unable to find the place where the tiger had taken 
the body to. 

Kot Kindri is about four miles south-west of Chuka, and three 
miles due west of Thak. It was in the valley between Kot Kindri 
and Thak that the Chuka man-eater had been shot the previous 
April. 

During the summer of '38 the Forest Department had marked 
all the trees in this area for felling, and it was feared that if the 
man-eater was not accounted for before November— when the 
felling of the forest was due to start— the contractors would 
not be able to secure labour, and would repudiate their 
contracts. It was in this connexion that Donald Stewart had 
written to me shortly after the girl had been killed, and when in 
compliance with his request I promised to go to Kot Kindri, I 
must confess that it was more in the interests of the local 
inhabitants than in the interest of the contractors that I gave 
my promise. 

My most direct route to Kot Kindri was to go by rail to 
Tanakpur, and from there by foot via Kaldhunga and Chuka. 



This route, however, though it would save me a hundred miles 
of walking, would necessitate my passing through the most 
deadly malaria belt in northern India, and to avoid it I decided 
to go through the hills to Mornaula, and from there along the 
abandoned Sherring road to its termination on the ridge above 
Kot Kindri. 

While my preparations for this long trek were still under way a 
second report reached Naini Tal of a kill at Sem, a small village 
on the left bank of the Ladhya and distant about half a mile 
from Chuka. 

The victim on this occasion was an elderly woman, the mother 
of the Headman of Sem. This unfortunate woman had been 
killed while cutting brushwood on a steep bank between two 
terraced fields. She had started work at the further end of the 
fifty-yard-long bank, and had cut the brushwood to within a 
yard of her hut when the tiger sprang on her from the field 
above. So sudden and unexpected was the attack that the 
woman only had time to scream once before the tiger killed 
her, and taking her up the twelve-foot-high bank crossed the 
upper field and disappeared with her into the dense jungle 
beyond. Her son, a lad some twenty years of age, was at the 
time working in a paddy field a few yards away and witnessed 
the whole occurrence, but was too frightened to try to render 
any assistance. In response to the lad's urgent summons the 
Patwari arrived at Sem two days later, accompanied by eighty 
men he had collected. Following up in the direction the tiger 
had gone, he found the woman's clothes and a few small bits of 
bone. This kill had taken place at 2 p.m. on a bright sunny day, 
and the tiger had eaten its victim only sixty yards from the hut 
where it had killed her. 

On receipt of this second report Ibbotson, Deputy 
Commissioner of the three Districts of Almora, Naini Tal and 
Garhwal, and I held, a council of war, the upshot of which was 
that Ibbotson, who was on the point of setting out to settle a 
land dispute at Askot on the border of Tibet, changed his tour 



programme and, instead of going via Bageshwar, decided to 
accompany me to Sem, and from there go on to Askot. 

The route I had selected entailed a considerable amount of hill¬ 
climbing so we eventually decided to go up the Nandhour 
valley cross the watershed between the Nandhour and Ladhya, 
and follow the latter river down to Sem. The Ibbotsons 
accordingly left Naini Tal on 12th October, and the following 
day I joined them at Chaurgallia. 

Going up the Nandhour and fishing as we went— our best day's 
catch on light trout rods was a hundred and twenty fish— we 
arrived on the fifth day at Durga Pepal. Here we left the river, 
and after a very stiff climb camped for the night on the 
watershed. Making an early start next morning we pitched our 
tents that night on the left bank of the Ladhya, twelve miles 
from Chalti. 

The monsoon had given over early, which was very fortunate 
for us, for owing to the rock cliffs that run sheer down into the 
valley the river has to be crossed every quarter of a mile or so. 
At one of these fords my cook, who stands five feet in his boots, 
was washed away and only saved from a watery grave by the 
prompt assistance of the man who was carrying our lunch 
basket. 

On the tenth day after leaving Chaurgallia we made camp on a 
deserted field at Sem, two hundred yards from the hut where 
the woman had been killed, and a hundred yards from the 
junction of the Ladhya and Sarda rivers. 

Gill Waddell, of the Police, whom we met on our way down the 
Ladhya, had camped for several days at Sem and had tied out a 
buffalo that MacDonald of the Forest Department had very 
kindly placed at our disposal, and though the tiger had visited 
Sem several times during Waddell 1 s stay, it had not killed the 
buffalo. 

The day following our arrival at Sem, while Ibbotson was 
interviewing Patwaris, Forest Guards, and Headmen of the 



surrounding villages, I went out to look for pug marks. Between 
our camp and the junction, and also on both banks of the 
Ladhya, there were long stretches of sand. On this sand I found 
the tracks of a tigress, and of a young male tiger— possibly one 
of the cubs I had seen in April. The tigress had crossed and 
recrossed the Ladhya a number of times during the last few 
days, and the previous night had walked along the strip of sand 
in front of our tents. It was this tigress the villagers suspected 
of being the man-eater, and as she had visited Sem repeatedly 
since the day the Headman's mother had been killed they were 
probably correct. 

An examination of the pug marks of the tigress showed her as 
being an average-sized animal, in the prime of life. Why she 
had become a man-eater would have to be determined later, 
but one of the reasons might have been that she had assisted to 
eat the victims of the Chuka tiger when they were together the 
previous mating season, and having acquired a taste for human 
flesh and no longer having a mate to provide her with it, had 
now turned a man-eater herself. This was only a surmise, and 
proved later to be incorrect. 

Before leaving Naini Tal I had written to the Tahsildar of 
Tanakpur and asked him to purchase four young male buffaloes 
for me, and to send them to Sem. One of these buffaloes died 
on the road, the other three arrived on the 24th , and we tied 
them out the same evening together with the one MacDonald 
had given us. On going out to visit these animals next morning 
I found the people of Chuka in a great state of excitement. The 
fields round the village had been recently ploughed, and the 
tigress the previous night had passed close to three families 
who were sleeping out on the fields with their cattle; 
fortunately in each case the cattle had seen the tigress and 
warned the sleepers of her approach. After leaving the 
cultivated land the tigress had gone up the track in the 
direction of Kot Kindri, and had passed close to two of our 
buffaloes without touching either of them. 



The Patwari, Forest Guards, and villagers had told us on our 
arrival at Sem that it would be a waste of time tying out our 
young buffaloes, as they were convinced the man-eater would 
not kill them. The reason they gave was that this method of 
trying to shoot the man-eater had been tried by others without 
success, and that in any case if the tigress wanted to eat 
buffaloes there were many grazing in the jungles for her to 
choose from. In spite of this advice however we continued to tie 
out our buffaloes, and for the next two nights the tigress 
passed close to one or more of them, without touching them. 

On the morning of the 27th, just as we were finishing 
breakfast, a party of men led by Tewari, the brother of the 
Headman of Thak, arrived in camp and reported that a man of 
their village was missing. They stated that this man had left the 
village at about noon the previous day, telling his wife before 
leaving that he was going to see that his cattle did not stray 
beyond the village boundary, and as he had not returned they 
feared he had been killed by the man-eater. 

Our preparations were soon made, and at ten o'clock the 
Ibbotsons and I set off for Thak, accompanied by Tewari and 
the men he had brought with him. The distance was only about 
two miles but the climb was considerable, and as we did not 
want to lose more time than we could possibly help we arrived 
at the outskirts of the village out of breath, and in a lather of 
sweat. 

As we approached the village over the scrub-covered flat bit of 
ground which I have reason to refer to later, we heard a woman 
crying. The wailing of an Indian woman mourning her dead is 
unmistakable, and on emerging from the jungle we came on the 
mourner— the wife of the missing man— and some ten or 
fifteen men, who were waiting for us on the edge of the 
cultivated land. These people informed us that from their 
houses above they had seen some white object, which looked 
like part of the missing man's clothing, in a field overgrown 
with scrub thirty yards from where we were now standing. 



Ibbotson, Tewari and I set off to investigate the white object, 
while Mrs Ibbotson took the woman and the rest of the men up 
to the village. 

The field, which had been out of cultivation for some years, was 
covered with a dense growth of scrub not unlike 
chrysanthemum, and it was not until we were standing right 
over the white object that Tewari recognized it as the loin-cloth 
of the missing man. Near it was the man's cap. A struggle had 
taken place at this spot, but there was no blood. The absence of 
blood where the attack had taken place and for some 
considerable distance along the drag could be accounted for by 
the tigress having retained her first hold, for no blood would 
flow in such a case until the hold had been changed. 

Thirty yards on the hill above us there was a clump of bushes 
roofed over with creepers. This spot would have to be looked at 
before following up the drag, for it was not advisable to have 
the tigress behind us. In the soft earth under the bushes we 
found the pug marks of the tigress, and where she had lain 
before going forward to attack the man. 

Returning to our starting point we agreed on the following plan 
of action. Our primary object was to try to stalk the tigress and 
shoot her on her kill: to achieve this end I was to follow the 
trail and at the same time keep a lookout in front, with Tewari 
— who was unarmed— a yard behind me keeping a sharp 
lookout to right and left, and Ibbotson a yard behind Tewari to 
safeguard us against an attack from the rear. In the event of 
either Ibbotson or I seeing so much as a hair of the tigress, we 
were to risk a shot. 

Cattle had grazed over this area the previous day, disturbing 
the ground, and as there was no blood and the only indication 
of the tigress's passage was an occasional turned-up leaf or 
crushed blade of grass, progress was slow. After carrying the 
man for two hundred yards the tigress had killed and left him, 
and had returned and carried him off several hours later, when 
the people of Thak had heard several sambur calling in this 



direction. The reason for the tigress not having carried the man 
away after she had killed him was possibly due to his cattle 
having witnessed the attack on him, and driven her away 

A big pool of blood had formed where the man had been lying, 
and as the blood from the wound in his throat had stopped 
flowing by the time the tigress had picked him up again, and 
further, as she was now holding him by the small of the back, 
whereas she had previously held him by the neck, tracking 
became even more difficult. The tigress kept to the contour of 
the hill, and as the undergrowth here was very dense and 
visibility only extended to a few yards, our advance was slowed 
down. In two hours we covered half a mile, and reached a ridge 
beyond which lay the valley in which, six months previously, we 
had tracked down and killed the Chuka man-eater. On this 
ridge was a great slab of rock, which sloped upwards and away 
from the direction in which we had come. The tigress's tracks 
went down to the right of the rock and I felt sure she was lying 
up under the overhanging portion of it, or in the close vicinity. 

Both Ibbotson and I had on light rubber-soled shoes— Tewari 
was bare-footed— and we had reached the rock without making 
a sound. Signing to my two companions to stand still and keep 
a careful watch all round, I got a foothold on the rock, and inch 
by inch went forward. Beyond the rock was a short stretch of 
flat ground, and as more of this ground came into view, I felt 
certain my suspicion that the tigress was lying under the 
projection was correct. I had still a foot or two to go before I 
could look over, when I saw a movement to my left front. A 
golden-rod that had been pressed down had sprung erect, and 
a second later there was a slight movement in the bushes 
beyond, and a monkey in a tree on the far side of the bushes 
started calling. 

The tigress had chosen the spot for her after-dinner sleep with 
great care, but unfortunately for us she was not asleep; and 
when she saw the top of my head— I had removed my hat- 
appearing over the rock, she had risen and, taking a step 



sideways, had disappeared under a tangle of blackberry 
bushes. Had she been lying anywhere but where she was she 
could not have got away no matter how quickly she had moved, 
without my getting a shot at her. Our so-carefully-carried-out 
stalk had failed at the very last moment, and there was nothing 
to be done now but find the kill, and see if there was sufficient 
of it left for us to sit up over. To have followed her into the 
blackberry thicket would have been useless, and would also 
have reduced our chance of getting a shot at her later. 

The tigress had eaten her meal close to where she had been 
lying and as this spot was open to the sky and to the keen eyes 
of vultures she had removed the kill to a place of safety where 
it would not be visible from the air. Tracking now was easy, for 
there was a blood trail to follow. The trail led over a ridge of 
great rocks and fifty yards beyond these rocks we found the 
kill. 

I am not going to harrow your feelings by attempting to 
describe that poor torn and mangled thing; stripped of every 
stitch of clothing and atom of dignity, which only a few hours 
previously had been a Man, the father of two children and the 
breadwinner of the wailing woman who was facing— without 
any illusions— the fate of a widow of India. I have seen many 
similar sights, each more terrible than the one preceding it, in 
the thirty-two years I have been hunting man-eaters, and on 
each occasion I have felt that it would have been better to have 
left the victim to the slayer than recover a mangled mass of 
flesh to be a nightmare ever after to those who saw it. And yet 
the cry of blood for blood, and the burning desire to rid a 
countryside of a menace than which there is none more 
terrible, is irresistible; and then there is always the hope, no 
matter how absurd one knows it to be, that the victim by some 
miracle may still be alive and in need of succour. 

The chance of shooting— over a kill— an animal that has in all 
probability become a man-eater through a wound received over 
a kill, is very remote, and each succeeding failure, no matter 



what its cause, tends to make the animal more cautious, until it 
reaches a state when it either abandons its kill after one meal 
or approaches it as silently and as slowly as a shadow, scanning 
every leaf and twig with the certainty of discovering its would- 
be slayer, no matter how carefully he may be concealed or how 
silent and motionless he may be; a one-in-a-million chance of 
getting a shot, and yet, who is there among us who would not 
take it? 

The thicket into which the tigress had retired was roughly forty 
yards square, and she could not leave it without the monkey 
seeing her and warning us, so we sat down back to back, to 
have a smoke and listen if the jungle had anything further to 
tell us while we considered our next move. 

To make a machan it was necessary to return to the village, and 
during our absence the tigress was almost certain to cany away 
the kill. It had been difficult when she was carrying a whole 
human being to track her, but now, when her burden was 
considerably lighter and she had been disturbed, she would 
probably go for miles and we might never find her kill again, so 
it was necessary for one of us to remain on the spot, while the 
other two went back to the village for ropes. 

Ibbotson, with his usual disregard for danger, elected to go 
back, and while he and Tewari went down the hill to avoid the 
difficult ground we had recently come over, I stepped up on to 
a small tree close to the kill. Four feet above ground the tree 
divided in two, and by leaning on one half and putting my feet 
against the other, I was able to maintain a precarious seat 
which was high enough off the ground to enable me to see the 
tigress if she approached the kill, and also high enough, if she 
had any designs on me, to see her before she got to within 
striking distance. 

Ibbotson had been gone fifteen or twenty minutes when I heard 
a rock tilt forward, and then back. The rock was evidently very 
delicately poised, and when the tigress had put her weight on it 
and felt it tilt forward she had removed her foot and let the 



rock fall back into place. The sound had come from about 
twenty yards to my left front, the only direction in which it 
would have been possible for me to have fired without being 
knocked out of the tree. 

Minutes passed, each pulling my hopes down a little lower from 
the heights to which they had soared, and then, when tension 
on my nerves and the weight of the heavy rifle were becoming 
unbearable, I heard a stick snap at the upper end of the 
thicket. Here was an example of how a tiger can move through 
the jungle. From the sound she had made I knew her exact 
position, had kept my eyes fixed on the spot, and yet she had 
come, seen me, stayed some time watching me, and then gone 
away without my having seen a leaf or a blade of grass move. 

When tension on nerves is suddenly relaxed cramped and 
aching muscles call loudly for ease, and though in this case it 
only meant the lowering of the rifle on to my knees to take the 
strain off my shoulders and arms, the movement, small though 
it was, sent a comforting feeling through the whole of my body. 
No further sound came from the tigress, and an hour or two 
later I heard Ibbotson returning. 

Of all the men I have been on shikar with Ibbotson is by far and 
away the best, for not only has he the heart of a lion, but he 
thinks of everything, and with it all is the most unselfish man 
that carries a gun. He had gone to fetch a rope and he returned 
with rugs, cushions, more hot tea than even I could drink and 
an ample lunch; and while I sat— on the windward side of the 
kill— to refresh myself, Ibbotson put a man in a tree forty yards 
away to distract the tigress's attention, and climbed into a tree 
overlooking the kill to make a rope machan. 

When the machan was ready Ibbotson moved the kill a few feet 
— a very unpleasant job— and tied it securely to the foot of a 
sapling to prevent the tigress carrying it away, for the moon 
was on the wane and the first two hours of the night at this 
heavily wooded spot would be pitch dark. After a final smoke I 
climbed on to the machan, and when I had made myself 



comfortable Ibbotson recovered the man who was making a 
diversion and set off in the direction of Thak to pick up Mrs 
Ibbotson and return to camp at Sem. 

The retreating party were out of sight but were not yet out of 
sound when I heard a heavy body brushing against leaves, and 
at the same moment the monkey which had been silent all this 
time and which I could now see sitting in a tree on the far side 
of the blackberry thicket, started calling. Here was more luck 
than I hoped for, and our ruse of putting a man up a tree to 
cause a diversion appeared to be working as successfully as it 
had done on a previous occasion. A tense minute passed, a 
second, and a third, and then from the ridge where I had 
climbed on to the big slab of rock a kakar came dashing down 
towards me, barking hysterically. The tigress was not coming to 
the kill but had gone off after Ibbotson. I was now in a fever of 
anxiety, for it was quite evident that she had abandoned her kill 
and gone to try to secure another victim. 

Before leaving Ibbotson had promised to take every precaution 
but on hearing the kakar barking on my side of the ridge he 
would naturally assume the tigress was moving in the vicinity 
of the kill, and if he relaxed his precautions the tigress would 
get her chance. Ten very uneasy minutes for me passed, and 
then I heard a second kakar barking in the direction of Thak; 
the tigress was still following, but the ground there was more 
open, and there was less fear of her attacking the party. The 
danger to the Ibbotsons was, however, not over by any means 
for they had to go through two miles of very heavy jungle to 
reach camp; and if they stayed at Thak until sundown listening 
for my shot, which I feared they would do and which as a 
matter of fact they did do, they would run a very grave risk on 
the way down. Ibbotson fortunately realized the danger and 
kept his party close together, and though the tigress followed 
them the whole way— as her pug marks the following morning 
showed— they got back to camp safely. 

The calling of kakar and sambur enabled me to follow the 



movements of the tigress. An hour after sunset she was down 
at the bottom of the valley two miles away She had the whole 
night before her, and though there was only one chance in a 
million of her returning to the kill I determined not to lose that 
chance. Wrapping a rug round me, for it was a bitterly cold 
night, I made myself comfortable in a position in which I could 
remain for hours without movement. 

I had taken my seat on the machan at 4 p.m., and at 10 p.m. I 
heard two animals coming down the hill towards me. It was too 
dark under the trees to see them, but when they got to the lee 
of the kill I knew they were porcupines. Rattling their quills, 
and making the peculiar booming noise that only a porcupine 
can make, they approached the kill and, after walking round it 
several times, continued on their way. An hour later, and when 
the moon had been up some time, I heard an animal in the 
valley below. It was moving from east to west, and when it 
came into the wind blowing downhill from the kill it made a 
long pause, and then came cautiously up the hill. While it was 
still some distance away I heard it snuffing the air, and knew it 
to be a bear. The smell of blood was attracting him, but 
mingled with it was the less welcome smell of a human being, 
and taking no chances he was very carefully stalking the kill. 
His nose, the keenest of any animal's in the jungle, had 
apprised him while he was still in the valley that the kill was 
the property of a tiger. This to a Himalayan bear who fears 
nothing, and who will, as I have on several occasions seen, 
drive a tiger away from its kill, was no deterrent, but what was, 
and what was causing him uneasiness, was the smell of a 
human being mingled with the smell of blood and tiger. 

On reaching the flat ground the bear sat down on his haunches 
a few yards from the kill, and when he had satisfied himself 
that the hated human smell held no danger for him he stood 
erect and turning his head sent a long-drawn-out cry, which I 
interpreted as a call to a mate, echoing down into the valley. 
Then without any further hesitation he walked boldly up to the 
kill, and as he nosed it I aligned the sights of my rifle on him. I 



know of only one instance of a Himalayan bear eating a human 
being; on that occasion a woman cutting grass had fallen down 
a cliff and been killed, and a bear finding the mangled body had 
carried it away and had eaten it. This bear, however, on whose 
shoulder my sights were aligned, appeared to draw the line at 
human flesh, and after looking at and smelling the kill 
continued his interrupted course to the west. When the sounds 
of his retreat died away in the distance the jungle settled down 
to silence until interrupted, a little after sunrise, by Ibbotson's 
very welcome arrival. 

With Ibbotson came the brother and other relatives of the dead 
man, who very reverently wrapped the remains in a clean white 
cloth and, laying it on a cradle made of two saplings and rope 
which Ibbotson provided, set off for the burning ghat on the 
banks of the Sarda, repeating under their breath as they went 
the Hindu hymn of praise 'Ram nam sat hai' with its refrain, 
'Satya bol gat hai 1 . 

Fourteen hours in the cold had not been without its effect on 
me, but after partaking of the hot drink and food Ibbotson had 
brought, I felt none the worse for my long vigil. 

II 

After following the Ibbotsons down to Chuka on the evening of 
the 27th the tigress, some time during the night, crossed the 
Ladhya into the scrub jungle at the back of our camp. Through 
this scrub ran a path that had been regularly used by the 
villagers of the Ladhya valley until the advent of the man-eater 
had rendered its passage unsafe. On the 28th the two mail- 
runners who carried Ibbotson's dak on its first stage to 
Tanakpur got delayed in camp and to save time took, or more 
correctly started to take, a short cut through this scrub. Very 
fortunately the leading man was on the alert and saw the 
tigress as she crept through the scrub and lay down near the 
path ahead of them. 

Ibbotson and I had just got back from Thak when these two 
men dashed into camp, and taking our rifles we hurried off to 


investigate. We found the pug marks of the tigress where she 
had come out on the path and followed the men for a short 
distance, but we did not see her though in one place where the 
scrub was very dense we saw a movement and heard an animal 
moving off. 

On the morning of the 29th, a party of men came down from 
Thak to report that one of their bullocks had not returned to 
the cattle-shed the previous night, and on a search being made 
where it had last been seen a little blood had been found. At 2 
p.m. the Ibbotsons and I were at this spot, and a glance at the 
ground satisfied us that the bullock had been killed and carried 
away by a tiger. After a hasty lunch Ibbotson and I, with two 
men following carrying ropes for a machan, set out along the 
drag. It went diagonally across the face of the hill for a 
hundred yards and then straight down into the ravine in which 
I had fired at and missed the big tiger in April. A few hundred 
yards down this ravine the bullock, which was an enormous 
animal, had got fixed between two rocks and, not being able to 
move it, the tiger had eaten a meal off its hind quarters and left 
it. 

The pug marks of the tiger, owing to the great weight she was 
carrying, were splayed out and it was not possible to say 
whether she was the man-eater or not; but as every tiger in this 
area was suspect I decided to sit up over the kill. There was 
only one tree within reasonable distance of the kill, and as the 
men climbed into it to make a machan the tiger started calling 
in the valley below. Very hurriedly a few strands of rope were 
tied between two branches, and while Ibbotson stood on guard 
with his rifle I climbed the tree and took my seat on what, 
during the next fourteen hours, proved to be the most 
uncomfortable as well as the most dangerous machan I have 
ever sat on. The tree was leaning away from the hill, and from 
the three uneven strands of rope I was sitting on there was a 
drop of over a hundred feet into the rocky ravine below. 

The tiger called several times as I was getting into the tree and 



continued to call at longer intervals late into the evening, the 
last call coming from a ridge half a mile away. It was now quite 
evident that the tiger had been lying up close to the kill and 
had seen the men climbing into the tree. Knowing from past 
experience what this meant, she had duly expressed 
resentment at being disturbed and then gone away, for though 
I sat on the three strands of rope until Ibbotson returned next 
morning I did not see or hear anything throughout the night. 

Vultures were not likely to find the kill, for the ravine was deep 
and overshadowed by trees, and as the bullock was large 
enough to provide the tiger with several meals we decided not 
to sit up over it again where it was now lying, hoping the tiger 
would remove it to some more convenient place where we 
should have a better chance of getting a shot. In this however 
we were disappointed, for the tiger did not again return to the 
kill. 

Two nights later the buffalo we had tied out behind our camp at 
Sem was killed, and through a little want of observation on my 
part a great opportunity of bagging the man-eater was lost. 

The men who brought in the news of this kill reported that the 
rope securing the animal had been broken, and that the kill had 
been carried away up the ravine at the lower end of which it 
had been tied. This was the same ravine in which MacDonald 
and I had chased a tigress in April, and as on that occasion she 
had taken her kill some distance up the ravine I now very 
foolishly concluded she had done the same with this kill. 

After breakfast Ibbotson and I went out to find the kill and see 
what prospect there was for an evening sit-up. 

The ravine in which the buffalo had been killed was about fifty 
yards wide and ran deep into the foot-hills. For two hundred 
yards the ravine was straight and then bent round to the left. 
Just beyond the bend, and on the left-hand side of it, there was 
a dense patch of young saplings backed by a hundred-foot 
ridge on which thick grass was growing. In the ravine, and 



close to the saplings, there was a small pool of water. I had 
been up the ravine several times in April and had failed to mark 
the patch of saplings as being a likely place for a tiger to lie up 
in, and did not take the precautions I should have taken when 
rounding the bend, with the result that the tigress who was 
drinking at the pool saw us first. There was only one safe line 
of retreat for her and she took it. This was straight up the steep 
hill, over the ridge, and into the sal forest beyond. 

The hill was too steep for us to climb, so we continued on up 
the ravine to where a sambur track crossed it, and following 
this track we gained the ridge. The tigress was now in a 
triangular patch of jungle bounded by the ridge, the Ladhya, 
and a cliff down which no animal could go. The area was not 
large, and there were several deer in it which from time to time 
advised us of the position of the tigress, but unfortunately the 
ground was cut up by a number of deep and narrow rain-water 
channels in which we eventually lost touch with her. 

We had not yet seen the kill, so we re-entered the ravine by the 
sambur track and found the kill hidden among the saplings. 
These saplings were from six inches to a foot in girth, and were 
not strong enough to support a machan, so we had to abandon 
the idea of a machan. With the help of a crowbar a rock could 
possibly have been prised from the face of the hill and a place 
made in which to sit, but this was not advisable when dealing 
with a man-eater. 

Reluctant to give up the chance of a shot we considered the 
possibility of concealing ourselves in the grass near the kill, in 
the hope that the tigress would return before dark and that we 
should see her before she saw us. There were two objections to 
this plan: (a) if we did not get a shot and the tigress saw us 
near her kill she might abandon it as she had done her other 
two kills and (b) between the kill and camp there was very 
heavy scrub jungle, and if we tried to go through this jungle in 
the dark the tigress would have us at her mercy. So very 
reluctantly we decided to leave the kill to the tigress for that 



night, and hope for the best on the morrow. 

On our return next morning we found that the tigress had 
carried away the kill. For three hundred yards she had gone up 
the bed of the ravine, stepping from rock to rock, and leaving 
no drag marks. At this spot— three hundred yards from where 
she had picked up the kill— we were at fault, for though there 
were a number of tracks on a wet patch of ground, none of 
them had been made while she was carrying the kill. 

Eventually, after casting round in circles, we found where she 
had left the ravine and gone up the hill on the left. 

This hill up which the tigress had taken her kill was overgrown 
with ferns and goldenrod and tracking was not difficult, but the 
going was, for the hill was very steep and in places a detour 
had to be made and the track picked up further on. After a stiff 
climb of a thousand feet we came to a small plateau, bordered 
on the left by a cliff a mile wide. On the side of the plateau 
nearest the cliff the ground was seamed and cracked, and in 
these cracks a dense growth of sal, two to six feet in height, 
had sprung up. The tigress had taken her kill into this dense 
cover and it was not until we actually trod on it that we were 
aware of its position. 

As we stopped to look at all that remained of the buffalo there 
was a low growl to our right. With rifles raised we waited for a 
minute and then, hearing a movement in the undergrowth a 
little beyond where the growl had come from, we pushed our 
way through the young sal for ten yards and came on a small 
clearing, where the tigress had made herself a bed on some 
soft grass. On the far side of this grass the hill sloped upwards 
for twenty yards to another plateau, and it was from this slope 
that the sound we had heard had come. Proceeding up the 
slope as silently as possible we had just reached the flat 
ground, which was about fifty yards wide, when the tigress left 
the far side and went down into the ravine, disturbing some 
kaleege pheasants and a kakar as she did so. To have followed 
her would have been useless, so we went back to the kill and. 



as there was still a good meal on it, we selected two trees to sit 
in, and returned to camp. 

After an early lunch we went back to the kill and, hampered 
with our rifles, climbed with some difficulty into the trees we 
had selected. We sat up for five hours without seeing or 
hearing anything. At dusk we climbed down from our trees, and 
stumbling over the cracked and uneven ground eventually 
reached the ravine when it was quite dark. Both of us had an 
uneasy feeling that we were being followed, but by keeping 
close together we reached camp without incident at 9 p.m. 

The Ibbotsons had now stayed at Sem as long as it was possible 
for them to do so, and early next morning they set out on their 
twelve days' walk to keep their appointment at Askot. Before 
leaving, Ibbotson extracted a promise from me that I would not 
follow up any kills alone, or further endanger my life by 
prolonging my stay at Sem for more than a day or two. 

After the departure of the Ibbotsons and their fifty men, the 
camp, which was surrounded by dense scrub, was reduced to 
my two servants and myself— my coolies were living in a room 
in the Headman's house— so throughout the day I set all hands 
to collecting driftwood, of which there was an inexhaustible 
supply at the junction, to keep a fire going all night. The fire 
would not scare away the tigress but it would enable us to see 
her if she prowled round our tents at night, and anyway the 
nights were setting in cold and there was ample excuse, if one 
were needed, for keeping a big fire going all night. 

Towards evening, when my men were safely back in camp, I 
took a rifle and went up the Ladhya to see if the tigress had 
crossed the river. I found several tracks in the sand, but no 
fresh ones, and at dusk I returned, convinced that the tigress 
was still on our side of the river. An hour later, when it was 
quite dark, a kakar started barking close to our tents and 
barked persistently for half an hour. 

My men had taken over the job of tying out the buffaloes, a 



task which Ibbotson's men had hitherto performed, and next 
morning I accompanied them when they went out to bring in 
the buffaloes. Though we covered several miles I did not find 
any trace of the tigress. After breakfast I took a rod and went 
down to the junction, and had one of the best day's fishing I 
have ever had. The junction was full of big fish, and though my 
light tackle was broken frequently I killed sufficient mahseer to 
feed the camp. 

Again, as on the previous evening, I crossed the Ladhya, with 
the intention of taking up a position on a rock overlooking the 
open ground on the right bank of the river and watching for the 
tigress to cross. As I got away from the roar of the water at the 
junction I heard a sambur and a monkey calling on the hill to 
my left, and as I neared the rock I came on the fresh tracks of 
the tigress. Following them back I found the stones still wet 
where she had forded the river. A few minutes' delay in camp to 
dry my fishing line and have a cup of tea cost a man his life, 
several thousand men weeks of anxiety, and myself many days 
of strain, for though I stayed at Sem for another three days I 
did not get another chance of shooting the tigress. 

On the morning of the 7th, as I was breaking camp and 
preparing to start on my twenty-mile walk to Tanakpur, a big 
contingent of men from all the surrounding villages arrived, 
and begged me not to leave them to the tender mercies of the 
maneater. Giving them what advice it was possible to give 
people situated as they were, I promised to return as soon as it 
was possible for me to do so. 

I caught the train at Tanakpur next morning and arrived back 
in Naini Tal on 9 November, having been away nearly a month. 

Ill 

I left Sem on the 7th of November and on the 12th the tigress 
killed a man at Thak. I received news of this kill through the 
Divisional Forest Officer, Haidwani, shortly after we had moved 
down to our winter home at the foot of the hills, and by doing 
forced marches I arrived at Chuka a little after sunrise on the 



24th. 


It had been my intention to breakfast at Chuka and then go on 
to Thak and make that village my headquarters, but the 
Headman of Thak, whom I found installed at Chuka, informed 
me that every man, woman, and child had left Thak 
immediately after the man had been killed on the 12th, and 
added that if I carried out my intention of camping at Thak I 
might be able to safeguard my own life, but it would not be 
possible to safeguard the lives of my men. This was quite 
reasonable, and while waiting for my men to arrive, the 
Headman helped me to select a site for my camp at Chuka 
where my men would be reasonably safe and I should have 
some privacy from the thousands of men who were now 
arriving to fell the forest. 

On receipt of the Divisional Forest Officer's telegram 
acquainting me of the kill, I had telegraphed to the Tahsildar at 
Tanakpur to send three young male buffaloes to Chuka. My 
request had been promptly complied with and the three 
animals had arrived the previous evening. 

After breakfast I took one of the buffaloes and set out for Thak, 
intending to tie it up on the spot where the man had been killed 
on the 12th. The Headman had given me a very graphic 
account of the events of that date, for he himself had nearly 
fallen a victim to the tigress. It appeared that towards the 
afternoon, accompanied by his granddaughter, a girl ten years 
of age, he had gone to dig up ginger tubers in a field some sixty 
yards from his house. This field is about half an acre in extent 
and is surrounded on three sides by jungle, and being on the 
slope of a fairly steep hill it is visible from the Headman's 
house. After the old man and his granddaughter had been at 
work for some time his wife, who was husking rice in the 
courtyard of the house, called out in a very agitated voice and 
asked him if he was deaf that he could not hear the pheasants 
and other birds that were chattering in the jungle above him. 
Fortunately for him, he acted promptly. Dropping his hoe, he 



grabbed the child's hand and together they ran back to the 
house, urged on by the woman who said she could now see a 
red animal in the bushes at the upper end of the field. Half an 
hour later the tigress killed a man who was lopping branches 
off a tree in a field three hundred yards from the Headman's 
house. 

From the description I had received from the Headman I had 
no difficulty in locating the tree. It was a small gnarled tree 
growing out of a three-foot-high bank between two terraced 
fields, and had been lopped year after year for cattle fodder. 
The man who had been killed was standing on the trunk 
holding one branch and cutting another, when the tigress came 
up from behind, tore his hold from the branch and, after killing 
him, carried him away into the dense brushwood bordering the 
fields. 

Thak village was a gift from the Chand Rajas, who ruled 
Kumaon for many hundreds of years before the Gurkha 
occupation, to the forefathers of the present owners in return 
for their services at the Punagiri temples. (The promise made 
by the Chand Rajas that the lands of Thak and two other 
villages would remain rent-free for all time has been honoured 
by the British Government for a hundred years.) From a 
collection of grass huts the village has in the course of time 
grown into a very prosperous settlement with masonry houses 
roofed with slate tiles, for not only is the land very fertile, but 
the revenue from the temples is considerable. 

Like all other villages in Kumaon, Thak during its hundreds of 
years of existence has passed through many vicissitudes, but 
never before in its long history had it been deserted as it now 
was. On my previous visits I had found it a hive of industry, but 
when I went up to it this afternoon, taking the young buffalo 
with me, silence reigned over it. Every one of the hundred or 
more inhabitants had fled taking their livestock with them— 
the only animal I saw in the village was a cat, which gave me a 
warm welcome; so hurried had the evacuation been that many 



of the doors of the houses had been left wide open. On every 
path in the village, in the courtyard of the houses and in the 
dust before all the doors I found the tigress's pug marks. The 
open doorways were a menace, for the path as it wound 
through the village passed close to them, and in any of the 
houses the tigress might have been lurking. 

On the hill thirty yards above the village were several cattle 
shelters, and in the vicinity of these shelters I saw more 
kaleege pheasants, red jungle fowl and white-capped babblers 
than I have ever before seen, and from the confiding way in 
which they permitted me to walk among them it is quite 
evident that the people of Thak have a religious prejudice 
against the taking of life. 

From the terraced fields above the cattle shelters a bird's-eye 
view of the village is obtained, and it was not difficult, from the 
description the Headman had given me, to locate the tree 
where the tigress had secured her last victim. In the soft earth 
under the tree there were signs of a struggle and a few clots of 
dried blood. From here the tigress had carried her kill a 
hundred yards over a ploughed field, through a stout hedge, 
and into the dense brushwood beyond. The foot-prints from the 
village, and back the way they had come, showed that the 
entire population of the village had visited the scene of the kill, 
but from the tree to the hedge there was only one track, the 
track the tigress had made when carrying away her victim. No 
attempt had been made to follow her up and recover the body. 

Scraping away a little earth from under the tree I exposed a 
root and to this root I tied my buffalo, bedding it down with a 
liberal supply of straw taken from a nearby haystack. 

The village, which is on the north face of the hill, was now in 
shadow, and if I was to get back to camp before dark it was 
time for me to make a start. Skirting round the village to avoid 
the menace of the open doorways, I joined the path below the 
houses. 



This path after it leaves the village passes under a giant mango 
tree from the roots of which issues a cold spring of clear water. 
After running along a groove cut in a massive slab of rock, this 
water falls into a rough masonry trough, from where it spreads 
onto the surrounding ground, rendering it soft and slushy. I had 
drunk at the spring on my way up, leaving my foot-prints in this 
slushy ground, and on approaching the spring now for a second 
drink, I found the tigress's pug marks superimposed on my 
foot-prints. After quenching her thirst the tigress had avoided 
the path and had gained the village by climbing a steep bank 
overgrown with strobilanthes and nettles, and taking up a 
position in the shelter of one of the houses had possibly 
watched me while I was tying up the buffalo, expecting me to 
return the way I had gone; it was fortunate for me that I had 
noted the danger of passing those open doorways a second 
time, and had taken the longer way round. 

When coming up from Chuka I had taken every precaution to 
guard against a sudden attack, and it was well that I had done 
so, for I now found from her pug marks that the tigress had 
followed me all the way up from my camp, and next morning 
when I went back to Thak I found she had followed me from 
where I had joined the path below the houses, right down to 
the cultivated land at Chuka. 

Reading with the illumination I had brought with me was not 
possible, so after dinner that night, while sitting near a fire 
which was as welcome for its warmth as it was for the feeling 
of security it gave me, I reviewed the whole situation and tried 
to think out some plan by which it would be possible to 
circumvent the tigress. 

When leaving home on the 22nd I had promised that I would 
return in ten days, and that this would be my last expedition 
after man-eaters. Years of exposure and strain and long 
absences from home extending as in the case of the Chowgarh 
tigress and the Rudraprayag leopard to several months on end 
were beginning to tell as much on my constitution as on the 



nerves of those at home, and if by the 30th of November I had 
not succeeded in killing this man-eater, others would have to be 
found who were willing to take on the task. 

It was now the night of the 24th, so I had six clear days before 
me. Judging from the behaviour of the tigress that evening she 
appeared to be anxious to secure another human victim, and it 
should not therefore be difficult for me, in the time at my 
disposal, to get in touch with her. There were several methods 
by which this could be accomplished, and each would be tried 
in turn. The method that offers the greatest chance of success 
of shooting a tiger in the hills is to sit up in a tree over a kill, 
and if during that night the tigress did not kill the buffalo I had 
tied up at Thak, I would the following night, and every night 
thereafter, tie up the other two buffaloes in places I had 
already selected, and failing to secure a human kill it was just 
possible that the tigress might kill one of my buffaloes, as she 
had done on a previous occasion when the Ibbotsons and I 
were camped at Sem in April. After making up the fire with 
logs that would burn all night, I turned in, and went to sleep 
listening to a kakar barking in the scrub jungle behind my tent. 

While breakfast was being prepared the following morning I 
picked up a rifle and went out to look for tracks on the stretch 
of sand on the right bank of the river, between Chuka and Sem. 
The path, after leaving the cultivated land, runs for a short 
distance through scrub jungle, and here I found the tracks of a 
big male leopard, possibly the same animal that had alarmed 
the kakar the previous night. A small male tiger had crossed 
and recrossed the Ladhya many times during the past week, 
and in the same period the man-eater had crossed only once, 
coming from the direction of Sem. A big bear had traversed the 
sand a little before my arrival, and when I got back to camp the 
timber contractors complained that while distributing work 
that morning they had run into a bear which had taken up a 
very threatening attitude, in consequence of which their labour 
had refused to work in the area in which the bear had been 


seen. 



Several thousand men— the contractors put the figure at five 
thousand— had now concentrated at Chuka and Kumaya Chak 
to fell and saw up the timber and carry it down to the motor 
road that was being constructed, and all the time this 
considerable labour force was working they shouted at the tops 
of their voices to keep up their courage. The noise in the valley 
resulting from axe and saw, the crashing of giant trees down 
the steep hillside, the breaking of rocks with sledge hammers, 
and combined with it all the shouting of thousands of men, can 
better be imagined than described. That there were many 
frequent alarms in this nervous community was only natural, 
and during the next few days I covered much ground and lost 
much valuable time in investigating false rumours of attacks 
and kills by the man-eater, for the dread of the tigress was not 
confined to the Ladhya valley but extended right down the 
Sarda through Kaldhunga to the gorge, an area of roughly fifty 
square miles in which an additional ten thousand men were 
working. 

That a single animal should terrorize a labour force of these 
dimensions in addition to the residents of the surrounding 
villages and the hundreds of men who were bringing foodstuffs 
for the labourers or passing through the valley with hill 
produce in the way of oranges (purchasable at twelve annas a 
hundred), walnuts, and chillies to the market at Tanakpur, is 
incredible, and would be unbelievable were it not for the 
historical, and nearly parallel, case of the man-eater of Tsavo, 
where a pair of lions, operating only at night, held up work for 
long periods on the Uganda Railway. 

To return to my story. Breakfast disposed of on the morning of 
the 25th, I took a second buffalo and set out for Thak. The path, 
after leaving the cultivated land at Chuka, skirts along the foot 
of the hill for about half a mile before it divides. One arm goes 
straight up a ridge to Thak and the other, after continuing 
along the foot of the hill for another half-mile, zigzags up 
through Kumaya Chak to Kot Kindri. 



At the divide I found the pug marks of the tigress and followed 
them all the way back to Thak. The fact that she had come 
down the hill after me the previous evening was proof that she 
had not killed the buffalo. This, though very disappointing, was 
not at all unusual; for tigers will on occasions visit an animal 
that is tied up for several nights in succession before they 
finally kill it, for tigers do not kill unless they are hungry. 

Leaving the second buffalo at the mango tree, where there was 
an abundance of green grass, I skirted round the houses and 
found No. 1 buffalo sleeping peacefully after a big feed and a 
disturbed night. The tigress, coming from the direction of the 
village as her pug marks showed, had approached to within a 
few feet of the buffalo, and had then gone back the way she 
had come. Taking the buffalo down to the spring I let it graze 
for an hour or two, and then took it back and tied it up at the 
same spot where it had been the previous night. 

The second buffalo I tied up fifty yards from the mango tree 
and at the spot where the wailing woman and villagers had met 
us the day the Ibbotsons and I had gone up to investigate the 
human kill. Here a ravine a few feet deep crossed the path, on 
one side of which there was a dry stump, and on the other an 
almond tree in which a machan could be made. I tied No. 2 
buffalo to the stump, and bedded it down with sufficient hay to 
keep it going for several days. There was nothing more to be 
done at Thak so I returned to camp and, taking the third 
buffalo, crossed the Ladhya and tied it up behind Sem, in the 
ravine where the tigress had killed one of our buffaloes in 
April. 

At my request the Tahsildar of Tanakpur had selected three of 
the fattest young male buffaloes he could find. All three were 
now tied up in places frequented by the tigress, and as I set out 
to visit them on the morning of the 26th I had great hopes that 
one of them had been killed and that I should get an 
opportunity of shooting the tigress over it. Starting with the 
one across the Ladhya, I visited all in turn and found that the 



tigress had not touched any of them. Again, as on the previous 
morning, I found her tracks on that path leading to Thak, but 
on this occasion there was a double set of pug marks, one 
coming down and the other going back. On both her journeys 
the tigress had kept to the path and had passed within a few 
feet of the buffalo that was tied to the stump, fifty yards from 
the mango tree. 

On my return to Chuka a deputation of Thak villagers led by 
the Headman came to my tent and requested me to accompany 
them to the village to enable them to replenish their supply of 
foodstuffs, so at midday, followed by the Headman and his 
tenants, and by four of my own men carrying ropes for a 
machan and food for me, I returned to Thak and mounted 
guard while the men hurriedly collected the provisions they 
needed. 

After watering and feeding the two buffaloes I retied No. 2 to 
the stump and took No. 1 half a mile down the hill and tied it to 
a sapling on the side of the path. I then took the villagers back 
to Chuka and returned a few hundred yards up the hill for a 
scratch meal while my men were making the machan. 

It was now quite evident that the tigress had no fancy for my 
fat buffaloes, and as in three days I had seen her tracks five 
times on the path leading to Thak, I decided to sit up over the 
path and try to get a shot at her that way. To give me warning 
of the tigress's approach I tied a goat with a bell round its neck 
on the path, and at 4 p.m. I climbed into the tree. I told my men 
to return at 8 a.m. the following morning, and began my watch. 

At sunset a cold wind started blowing and while I was 
attempting to pull a coat over my shoulders the ropes on one 
side of the machan slipped, rendering my seat very 
uncomfortable. An hour later a storm came on, and though it 
did not rain for long it wet me to the skin, greatly adding to my 
discomfort. During the sixteen hours I sat in the tree I did not 
see or hear anything. The men turned up at 8 a.m. I returned to 
camp for a hot bath and a good meal, and then, accompanied 



by six of my men, set out for Thak. 

The overnight rain had washed all the old tracks off the path, 
and two hundred yards above the tree I had sat in I found the 
fresh pug marks of the tigress, where she had come out of the 
jungle and gone up the path in the direction of Thak. Very 
cautiously I stalked the first buffalo, only to find it lying asleep 
on the path; the tigress had skirted round it, rejoined the path 
a few yards further on and continued up the hill. Following on 
her tracks I approached the second buffalo, and as I got near 
the place where it had been tied two blue Himalayan magpies 
rose off the ground and went screaming down the hill. 

The presence of these birds indicated (a) that the buffalo was 
dead, (b) that it had been partly eaten and not carried away, 
and (c) that the tigress was not in the close vicinity 

On arrival at the stump to which it had been tied I saw that the 
buffalo had been dragged off the path and partly eaten, and on 
examining the animal I found that it had not been killed by the 
tigress but that it had in all probability died of snake-bite (there 
were many hamadryads in the surrounding jungles), and that, 
finding it lying dead on the path, the tigress had eaten a meal 
off it and had then tried to drag it away When she found she 
could not break the rope, she had partly covered the kill over 
with dry leaves and brush-wood and continued on her way up 
to Thak. 

Tigers as a rule are not carrion eaters but they do on occasions 
eat animals they themselves have not killed. For instance, on 
one occasion I left the carcass of a leopard on a fire track and, 
when I returned next morning to recover a knife I had 
forgotten, I found that a tiger had removed the carcass to a 
distance of a hundred yards and eaten two-thirds of it. 

On my way up from Chuka I had dismantled the machan I had 
sat on the previous night, and while two of my men climbed 
into the almond tree to make a seat for me— the tree was not 
big enough for a machan— the other four went to the spring to 



fill a kettle and boil some water for tea. By 4 p.m. I had 
partaken of a light meal of biscuits and tea which would have 
to keep me going until next day and refusing the men's request 
to be permitted to stay the night in one of the houses in Thak, I 
sent them back to camp. There was a certain amount of risk in 
doing this, but it was nothing compared to the risk they would 
run if they spent the night in Thak. 

My seat on the tree consisted of several strands of rope tied 
between two upright branches, with a couple of strands lower 
down for my feet to rest on. When I had settled down 
comfortably I pulled the branches round me and secured them 
in position with a thin cord, leaving a small opening to see and 
fire through. My 'hide 7 was soon tested, for shortly after the 
men had gone the two magpies returned, and attracted others, 
and nine of them fed on the kill until dusk. The presence of the 
birds enabled me to get some sleep, for they would have given 
me warning of the tigress's approach, and with their departure 
my all-night vigil started. 

There was still sufficient daylight to shoot by when the moon, a 
day off the full, rose over the Nepal hills behind me and flooded 
the hillside with brilliant light. The rain of the previous night 
had cleared the atmosphere of dust and smoke and, after the 
moon had been up a few minutes, the light was so good that I 
was able to see a sambur and her young one feeding in a field 
of wheat a hundred and fifty yards away. 

The dead buffalo was directly in front and about twenty yards 
away, and the path along which I expected the tigress to come 
was two or three yards nearer, so I should have an easy shot at 
a range at which it would be impossible to miss the tigress- 
provided she came; and there was no reason why she should 
not do so. 

The moon had been up two hours, and the sambur had 
approached to within fifty yards of my tree, when a kakar 
started barking on the hill just above the village. The kakar had 
been barking for some minutes when suddenly a scream which 



I can only very inadequately describe as 'Ar-Ar-Arr' dying away 
on a long-drawn-out note, came from the direction of the 
village. So sudden and so unexpected had the scream been that 
I involuntarily stood up with the intention of slipping down 
from the tree and dashing up to the village, for the thought 
flashed through my mind that the man-eater was killing one of 
my men. Then in a second flash of thought I remembered I had 
counted them one by one as they had passed my tree, and that 
I had watched them out of sight on their way back to camp to 
see if they were obeying my instructions to keep close together. 

The scream had been the despairing cry of a human being in 
mortal agony, and reason questioned how such a sound could 
have come from a deserted village. It was not a thing of my 
imagination, for the kakar had heard it and had abruptly 
stopped barking, and the sambur had dashed away across the 
fields closely followed by her young one. Two days previously, 
when I had escorted the men to the village, I had remarked 
that they appeared to be very confiding to leave their property 
behind doors that were not even shut or latched, and the 
Headman had answered that even if their village remained 
untenanted for years their property would be quite safe, for 
they were priests of Punagiri and no one would dream of 
robbing them; he added that as long as the tigress lived she 
was a better guard of their property— if guard were needed— 
than any hundred men could be, for no one in all that 
countryside would dare to approach the village, for any 
purpose, through the dense forests that surrounded it, unless 
escorted by me as they had been. 

The screams were not repeated, and as there appeared to be 
nothing that I could do I settled down again on my rope seat. At 
10 p.m. a kakar that was feeding on the young wheat crop at 
the lower end of the fields dashed away barking, and a minute 
later the tigress called twice. She had now left the village and 
was on the move, and even if she did not fancy having another 
meal off the buffalo there was every hope of her coming along 
the path which she had used twice every day for the past few 



days. With finger on trigger and eyes straining on the path I sat 
hour after hour until daylight succeeded moonlight, and when 
the sun had been up an hour, my men returned. Very 
thoughtfully they had brought a bundle of dry wood with them, 
and in a surprisingly short time I was sitting down to a hot cup 
of tea. The tigress may have been lurking in the bushes close to 
us, or she may have been miles away, for after she had called at 
10 p.m. the jungles had been silent. 

When I got back to camp I found a number of men sitting near 
my tent. Some of these men had come to inquire what luck I 
had had the previous night, and others had come to tell me that 
the tigress had called from midnight to a little before sunrise at 
the foot of the hill, and that all the labourers engaged in the 
forests and on the new export road were too frightened to go to 
work. I had already heard about the tigress from my men, who 
had informed me that, together with the thousands of men who 
were camped round Chuka, they had sat up all night to keep 
big fires going. 

Among the men collected near my tent was the Headman of 
Thak, and when the others had gone I questioned him about 
the kill at Thak on the 12 th of the month when he so narrowly 
escaped falling a victim to the man-eater. 

Once again the Headman told me in great detail how he had 
gone to his fields to dig ginger, taking his grandchild with him, 
and how on hearing his wife calling he had caught the child's 
hand and run back to the house— where his wife had said a 
word or two to him about not keeping his ears open and 
thereby endangering his own and the child's life— and how a 
few minutes later the tigress had killed a man while he was 
cutting leaves off a tree in a field above his house. 

All this part of the story I had heard before, and I now asked 
him if he had actually seen the tigress killing the man. His 
answer was, no; and he added that the tree was not visible 
from where he had been standing. I then asked him how he 
knew the man had been killed, and he said, because he had 



heard him. In reply to further questions he said the man had 
not called for help but had cried out; and when asked if he had 
cried out once he said, 'No, three times ', and then at my 
request he gave an imitation of the man's cry. It was the same— 
but a very modified rendering— as the screams I had heard the 
previous night. 

I then told him what I had heard and asked him if it was 
possible for anyone to have arrived at the village accidentally, 
and his answer was an emphatic negative. There were only two 
paths leading to Thak, and every man, woman, and child in the 
villages through which these two paths passed knew that Thak 
was deserted and the reason for its being so. It was known 
throughout the district that it was dangerous to go near Thak 
in daylight, and it was therefore quite impossible for anyone to 
have been in the village at eight o'clock the previous night. 

When asked if he could give any explanation for screams 
having come from a village in which there could not— 
according to him— have been any human beings, his answer 
was that he could not. 

And as I could do no better than the Headman it were best to 
assume that neither the kakar, the sambur, nor I heard those 
very real screams— the screams of a human being in mortal 
agony. 

IV 

When all my visitors, including the Headman, had gone, and I 
was having breakfast, my servant informed me that the 
Headman of Sem had come to the camp the previous evening 
and had left word for me that his wife, while cutting grass near 
the hut where his mother had been killed, had come on a blood 
trail, and that he would wait for me near the ford over the 
Ladhya in the morning. So after breakfast I set out to 
investigate this trail. 

While I was fording the river I saw four men hurrying towards 
me, and as soon as I was on dry land they told me that when 


they were coming down the hill above Sem they had heard a 
tiger calling across the valley on the hill between Chuka and 
Thak. The noise of the water had prevented my hearing the 
call. I told the men that I was on my way to Sem and would 
return to Chuka shortly and left them. 

The Headman was waiting for me near his house, and his wife 
took me to where she had seen the blood trail the previous day. 
The trail, after continuing along a field for a short distance, 
crossed some big rocks, on one of which I found the hairs of a 
kakar. A little further on I found the pug marks of a big male 
leopard, and while I was looking at them I heard a tiger call. 
Telling my companions to sit down and remain quiet, I listened, 
in order to locate the tiger. Presently I heard the call again, and 
thereafter it was repeated at intervals of about two minutes. 

It was the tigress calling and I located her as being five 
hundred yards below Thak and in the deep ravine which, 
starting from the spring under the mango tree, runs parallel to 
the path and crosses it at its junction with the Kumaya Chak 
path. 

Telling the Headman that the leopard would have to wait to be 
shot at a more convenient time, I set off as hard as I could go 
for camp, picking up at the ford the four men who were waiting 
for my company to Chuka. 

On reaching camp I found a crowd of men round my tent, most 
of them sawyers from Delhi, but including the petty 
contractors, agents, clerks, timekeepers, and gangmen of the 
financier who had taken up the timber and road construction 
contracts in the Ladhya valley. These men had come to see me 
in connexion with my stay at Chuka. They informed me that 
many of the hillmen carrying timber and working on the road 
had left for their homes that morning and that if I left Chuka on 
1st December, as they had heard I intended doing, the entire 
labour force, including themselves, would leave on the same 
day; for already they were too frightened to eat or sleep, and 
no one would dare to remain in the valley after I had gone. It 



was then the morning of 29th November and I told the men 
that I still had two days and two nights and that much could 
happen in that time, but that in any case it would not be 
possible for me to prolong my stay beyond the morning of the 
1st. 

The tigress had by now stopped calling, and when my servant 
had put up something for me to eat I set out for Thak, 
intending, if the tigress called again and I could locate her 
position; to try to stalk her; and if she did not call again, to sit 
up over the buffalo. I found her tracks on the path and saw 
where she had entered the ravine, and though I stopped 
repeatedly on my way up to Thak and listened I did not hear 
her again. So a little before sunset I ate the biscuits and drank 
the bottle of tea I had brought with me, and then climbed into 
the almond tree and took my seat on the few strands of rope 
that had to serve me as a machan. On this occasion the 
magpies were absent, so I was unable to get the hour or two's 
sleep the birds had enabled me to get the previous evening. 

If a tiger fails to return to its kill the first night it does not 
necessarily mean that the kill has been abandoned. I have on 
occasions seen a tiger return on the tenth night and eat what 
could no longer be described as fresh. On the present occasion, 
however, I was not sitting over a kill, but over an animal that 
the tigress had found dead and off which she had made a small 
meal, and had she not been a man-eater I would not have 
considered the chance of her returning the second night good 
enough to justify spending a whole night in a tree when she 
had not taken sufficient interest in the dead buffalo to return to 
it the first night. It was therefore with very little hope of 
getting a shot that I sat on the tree from sunset to sunrise, and 
though the time I spent was not as long as it had been the 
previous night, my discomfort was very much greater, for the 
ropes I was sitting on cut into me, and a cold wind that started 
blowing shortly after moonrise and continued throughout the 
night chilled me to the bone. On this second night I heard no 
jungle or other sounds nor did the sambur and her young one 



come out to feed on the fields. As daylight was succeeding 
moonlight I thought I heard a tiger call in the distance, but 
could not be sure of the sound or of its direction. 

When I got back to camp my servant had a cup of tea and a hot 
bath ready for me, but before I could indulge in the latter— my 
40-lb. tent was not big enough for me to bathe in— I had to get 
rid of the excited throng of people who were clamouring to tell 
me their experiences of the night before. It appeared that 
shortly after moonrise the tigress had started calling close to 
Chuka, and after calling at intervals for a couple of hours had 
gone off in the direction of the labour camps at Kumaya Chak. 
The men in these camps hearing her coming started shouting 
to try to drive her away, but so far from having this effect the 
shouting only infuriated her the more and she demonstrated in 
front of the camps until she had cowed the men into silence. 
Having accomplished this she spent the rest of the night 
between the labour camps and Chuka, daring all and sundry to 
shout at her. Towards morning she had gone away in the 
direction of Thak, and my informants were surprised and very 
disappointed that I had not met her. 

This was my last day of man-eater hunting, and though I was 
badly in need of rest and sleep, I decided to spend what was 
left of it in one last attempt to get in touch with the tigress. 

The people not only of Chuka and Sem but of all the 
surrounding villages, and especially the men from Talla Des 
where some years previously I had shot three man-eaters, were 
very anxious that I should try sitting up over a live goat, for, 
said they, 'All hill tigers eat goats, and as you have had no luck 
with buffaloes, why not try a goat? 1 More to humour them than 
with any hope of getting a shot, I consented to spend this last 
day in sitting up over the two goats I had already purchased for 
this purpose. 

I was convinced that no matter where the tigress wandered to 
at night her headquarters were at Thak, so at midday, taking 
the two goats, and accompanied by four of my men, I set out 



for Thak. 

The path from Chuka to Thak, as I have already mentioned, 
runs up a very steep ridge. A quarter of a mile on this side of 
Thak the path leaves the ridge, and crosses a more or less flat 
bit of ground which extends right up to the mango tree. For its 
whole length across this flat ground the path passes through 
dense brushwood, and is crossed by two narrow ravines which 
run east and join the main ravine. Midway between these two 
ravines, and a hundred yards from the tree I had sat in the 
previous two nights, there is a giant almond tree; this tree had 
been my objective when I left camp. The path passes right 
under the tree and I thought that if I climbed half-way up not 
only should I be able to see the two goats, one of which I 
intended tying at the edge of the main ravine and the other at 
the foot of the hill to the right, but I should also be able to see 
the dead buffalo. As all three of these points were at some 
distance from the tree, I armed myself with an accurate *275 
rifle, in addition to the 450/400 rifle which I took for an 
emergency. 

I found the climb up from Chuka on this last day very trying, 
and I had just reached the spot where the path leaves the ridge 
for the flat ground, when the tigress called about a hundred 
and fifty yards to my left. The ground here was covered with 
dense undergrowth and trees interlaced with creepers, and 
was cut up by narrow and deep ravines, and strewn over with 
enormous boulders— a very unsuitable place in which to stalk a 
man-eater. However, before deciding on what action I should 
take it was necessary to know whether the tigress was lying 
down, as she very well might be, for it was then 1 p.m., or 
whether she was on the move and if so in what direction. So 
making the men sit down behind me I listened, and presently 
the call was repeated; she had moved some fifty yards, and 
appeared to be going up the main ravine in the direction of 
Thak. 

This was very encouraging, for the tree I had selected to sit in 



was only fifty yards from the ravine. After enjoining silence on 
the men and telling them to keep close behind me, we hurried 
along the path. We had about two hundred yards to go to reach 
the tree and had covered half the distance when, as we 
approached a spot where the path was bordered on both sides 
by dense brushwood, a covey of kaleege pheasants rose out of 
the brushwood and went screaming away. I knelt down and 
covered the path for a few minutes, but as nothing happened 
we went cautiously forward and reached the tree without 
further incident. As quickly and as silently as possible one goat 
was tied at the edge of the ravine, while the other was tied at 
the foot of the hill to the right; then I took the men to the edge 
of the cultivated land and told them to stay in the upper 
verandah of the Headman's house until I fetched them, and ran 
back to the tree. I climbed to a height of forty feet, and pulled 
the rifle up after me with a cord I had brought for the purpose. 
Not only were the two goats visible from my seat, one at a 
range of seventy and the other at a range of sixty yards, but I 
could also see part of the buffalo, and as the *275 rifle was 
very accurate I felt sure I could kill the tigress if she showed up 
anywhere on the ground I was overlooking. 

The two goats had lived together ever since I had purchased 
them on my previous visit, and, being separated now, were 
calling lustily to each other. Under normal conditions a goat 
can be heard at a distance of four hundred yards, but here the 
conditions were not normal, for the goats were tied on the side 
of a hill down which a strong wind was blowing, and even if the 
tigress had moved after I had heard her, it was impossible for 
her not to hear them. If she was hungry, as I had every reason 
to believe she was, there was a very good chance of my getting 
a shot. 

After I had been on the tree for ten minutes a kakar barked 
near the spot the pheasants had risen from. For a minute or 
two my hopes rose sky-high and then dropped back to earth, 
for the kakar barked only three times and ended on a note of 
inquiry; evidently there was a snake in the scrub which neither 



he nor the pheasants liked the look of. 

My seat was not uncomfortable and the sun was pleasingly 
warm, so for the next three hours I remained in the tree 
without any discomfort. At 4 p.m. the sun went down behind 
the high hill above Thak and thereafter the wind became 
unbearably cold. For an hour I stood the discomfort, and then 
decided to give up, for the cold had brought on an attack of 
ague, and if the tigress came now it would not be possible for 
me to hit her. I retied the cord to the rifle and let it down, 
climbed down myself and walked to the edge of the cultivated 
land to call up my men. 

V 

There are few people, I imagine, who have not experienced that 
feeling of depression that follows failure to accomplish 
anything they have set out to do. The road back to camp after a 
strenuous day when the chukor(Hill partridge.) bag is full is 
only a step compared with the same road which one plods over, 
mile after weary mile, when the bag is empty, and if this feeling 
of depression has ever assailed you at the end of a single day, 
and when the quarry has only been chukor, you will have some 
idea of the depth of my depression that evening when, after 
calling up my men and untying the goats, I set off on my two- 
mile walk to camp, for my effort had been not of a single day or 
my quarry a few birds, nor did my failure concern only myself. 

Excluding the time spent on the journeys from and to home, I 
had been on the heels of the man-eater from 23rd October to 
7th November, and again from 24th to 30th November, and it is 
only those of you who have walked in fear of having the teeth 
of a tiger meet in your throat who will have any idea of the 
effect on one's nerves of days and weeks of such anticipation. 

Then again my quarry was a man-eater, and my failure to shoot 
it would very gravely affect everyone who was working in, or 
whose homes were in, that area. Already work in the forests 
had been stopped, and the entire population of the largest 
village in the district had abandoned their homes. Bad as the 


conditions were they would undoubtedly get worse if the man- 
eater was not killed, for the entire labour force could not afford 
to stop work indefinitely nor could the population of 
surrounding villages afford to abandon their homes and their 
cultivation as the more prosperous people of Thak had been 
able to do. 

The tigress had long since lost her natural fear of human 
beings as was abundantly evident from her having carried 
away a girl picking up mangoes in a field close to where 
several men were working, killing a woman near the door of 
her house, dragging a man off a tree in the heart of a village, 
and, the previous night, cowing a few thousand men into 
silence. And here was I, who knew full well what the presence 
of a man-eater meant to the permanent and to the temporary 
inhabitants and to all the people who passed through the 
district on their way to the markets at the foot-hills or the 
temples at Punagiri, plodding down to camp on what I had 
promised others would be my last day of man-eater hunting; 
reason enough for a depression of soul which I felt would 
remain with me for the rest of my days. Gladly at that moment 
would I have bartered the success that had attended thirty-two 
years of man-eater hunting for one unhurried shot at the 
tigress. 

I have told you of some of the attempts I made during this 
period of seven days and seven nights to get a shot at the 
tigress, but these were by no means the only attempts I made. I 
knew that I was being watched and followed, and every time I 
went through the two miles of jungle between my camp and 
Thak I tried every trick I have learnt in a lifetime spent in the 
jungles to outwit the tigress. Bitter though my disappointment 
was, I felt that my failure was not in any way due to anything I 
had done or left undone. 

VI 

My men when they rejoined me said that, an hour after the 
kakar had barked, they had heard the tigress calling a long way 


off but were not sure of the direction. Quite evidently the 
tigress had as little interest in goats as she had in buffaloes, 
but even so it was unusual for her to have moved at that time of 
day from a locality in which she was thoroughly at home, 
unless she had been attracted away by some sound which 
neither I nor my men had heard; however that may have been, 
it was quite evident that she had gone, and as there was 
nothing further that I could do I set off on my weary tramp to 
camp. 

The path, as I have already mentioned, joins the ridge that runs 
down to Chuka a quarter of a mile from Thak, and when I now 
got to this spot where the ridge is only a few feet wide and 
from where a view is obtained of the two great ravines that run 
down to the Ladhya river, I heard the tigress call once and 
again across the valley on my left. She was a little above and to 
the left of Kumaya Chak, and a few hundred yards below the 
Kot Kindri ridge on which the men working in that area had 
built themselves grass shelters. 

Here was an opportunity, admittedly forlorn and 
unquestionably desperate, of getting a shot; still it was an 
opportunity and the last I should ever have, and the question 
was, whether or not I was justified in taking it. 

When I got down from the tree I had one hour in which to get 
back to camp before dark. Calling up the men, hearing what 
they had to say, collecting the goats and walking to the ridge 
had taken about thirty minutes, and judging from the position 
of the sun which was now casting a red glow on the peaks of 
the Nepal hills, I calculated I had roughly half an hour's 
daylight in hand. This time factor, or perhaps it would be more 
correct to say light factor, was all-important, for if I took the 
opportunity that offered, on it would depend the lives of five 
men. 

The tigress was a mile away and the intervening ground was 
densely wooded, strewn over with great rocks and cut up by a 
number of deep nullahs, but she could cover the distance well 



within the half-hour— if she wanted to. The question I had to 
decide was, whether or not I should try to call her up. If I called 
and she heard me, and came while it was still daylight and gave 
me a shot, all would be well; on the other hand, if she came and 
did not give me a shot some of us would not reach camp, for we 
had nearly two miles to go and the path the whole way ran 
through heavy jungle, and was bordered in some places by big 
rocks, and in others by dense brushwood. It was useless to 
consult the men, for none of them had ever been in a jungle 
before coming on this trip, so the decision would have to be 
mine. 

I decided to try to call up the tigress. 

Handing my rifle over to one of the men I waited until the 
tigress called again and, cupping my hands round my mouth 
and filling my lungs to their utmost limit, sent an answering 
call over the valley. Back came her call and thereafter, for 
several minutes, call answered call. She would come, had in 
fact already started, and if she arrived while there was light to 
shoot by, all the advantages would be on my side, for I had the 
selecting of the ground on which it would best suit me to meet 
her. November is the mating season for tigers and it was 
evident that for the past forty-eight hours she had been 
rampaging through the jungles in search of a mate, and that 
now, on hearing what she thought was a tiger answering her 
mating call, she would lose no time in joining him. 

Four hundred yards down the ridge the path runs for fifty yards 
across a flat bit of ground. At the far right-hand side of this flat 
ground the path skirts a big rock and then drops steeply, and 
continues in a series of hairpin bends, down to the next bend. It 
was at this rock I decided to meet the tigress, and on my way 
down to it I called several times to let her know I was changing 
my position, and also to keep in touch with her. 

I want you now to have a clear picture of the ground in your 
mind, to enable you to follow the subsequent events. Imagine 
then a rectangular piece of ground forty yards wide and eighty 



yards long, ending in a more or less perpendicular rock face. 
The path coming down from Thak runs on to this ground at its 
short or south end, and after continuing down the centre for 
twenty-five yards bends to the right and leaves the rectangle 
on its long or east side. At the point where the path leaves the 
flat ground there is a rock about four feet high. From a little 
beyond where the path bends to the right, a ridge of rock, 
three or four feet high, rises and extends to the north side of 
the rectangle, where the ground falls away in a perpendicular 
rock face. On the near or path side of this low ridge there is a 
dense line of bushes approaching to within ten feet of the four- 
foot-high rock I have mentioned. The rest of the rectangle is 
grown over with trees, scattered bushes, and short grass. 

It was my intention to lie on the path by the side of the rock 
and shoot the tigress as she approached me, but when I tried 
this position I found it would not be possible for me to see her 
until she was within two or three yards, and further, that she 
could get at me either round the rock or through the scattered 
bushes on my left without my seeing her at all. Projecting out 
of the rock, from the side opposite to that from which I 
expected the tigress to approach, there was a narrow ledge. By 
sitting sideways I found I could get a little of my bottom on the 
ledge, and by putting my left hand flat on the top of the 
rounded rock and stretching out my right leg to its full extent 
and touching the ground with my toes, retain my position on it. 
The men and goats I placed immediately behind, and ten to 
twelve feet below me. 

The stage was now set for the reception of the tigress, who 
while these preparations were being made had approached to 
within three hundred yards. Sending out one final call to give 
her direction, I looked round to see if my men were all right. 

The spectacle these men presented would under other 
circumstances have been ludicrous, but was here tragic. Sitting 
in a tight little circle with their knees drawn up and their heads 
together, with the goats burrowing in under them, they had 



that look of intense expectancy on their screwed-up features 
that one sees on the faces of spectators waiting to hear a big 
gun go off. From the time we had first heard the tigress from 
the ridge, neither the men nor the goats had made a sound, 
beyond one suppressed cough. They were probably by now 
frozen with fear— as well they might be— and even if they 
were I take my hat off to those four men who had the courage 
to do what I, had I been in their shoes, would not have dreamt 
of doing. For seven days they had been hearing the most 
exaggerated and blood-curdling tales of this fearsome beast 
that had kept them awake the past two nights, and now, while 
darkness was coming on, and sitting unarmed in a position 
where they could see nothing, they were listening to the man- 
eater drawing nearer and nearer; greater courage, and greater 
faith, it is not possible to conceive. 

The fact that I could not hold my rifle, a D.B. 450/400, with my 
left hand (which I was using to retain my precarious seat on the 
ledge) was causing me some uneasiness, for apart from the 
fear of the rifle slipping on the rounded top of the rock— I had 
folded my handkerchief and placed the rifle on it to try to 
prevent this— I did not know what would be the effect of the 
recoil of a high velocity rifle fired in this position. The rifle was 
pointing along the path, in which there was a hump, and it was 
my intention to fire into the tigress's face immediately it 
appeared over this hump, which was twenty feet from the rock. 

The tigress however did not keep to the contour of the hill, 
which would have brought her out on the path a little beyond 
the hump, but crossed a deep ravine and came straight towards 
where she had heard my last call, at an angle which I can best 
describe as one o'clock. This manoeuvre put the low ridge of 
rock, over which I could not see, between us. She had located 
the direction of my last call with great accuracy, but had 
misjudged the distance, and not finding her prospective mate 
at the spot she had expected him to be, she was now working 
herself up into a perfect fury, and you will have some idea of 
what the fury of a tigress in her condition can be when I tell 



you that not many miles from my home a tigress on one 
occasion closed a public road for a whole week, attacking 
everything that attempted to go along it, including a string of 
camels, until she was finally joined by a mate. 

I know of no sound more liable to fret one's nerves than the 
calling of an unseen tiger at close range. What effect this 
appalling sound was having on my men I was frightened to 
think, and if they had gone screaming down the hill I should 
not have been at all surprised, for even though I had the heel of 
a good rifle to my shoulder and the stock against my cheek I 
felt like screaming myself. 

But even more frightening than this continuous calling was the 
fading out of the light. Another few seconds, ten or fifteen at 
the most, and it would be too dark to see my sights, and we 
should then be at the mercy of a man-eater, plus a tigress 
wanting a mate. Something would have to be done, and done in 
a hurry if we were not to be massacred, and the only thing I 
could think of was to call. 

The tigress was now so close that I could hear the intake of her 
breath each time before she called, and as she again filled her 
lungs, I did the same with mine, and we called simultaneously. 
The effect was startingly instantaneous. Without a second's 
hesitation she came tramping with quick steps through the 
dead leaves, over the low ridge and into the bushes a little to 
my right front, and just as I was expecting her to walk right on 
top of me she stopped, and the next moment the full blast of 
her deep-throated call struck me in the face and would have 
carried the hat off my head had I been wearing one. A second's 
pause, then again quick steps; a glimpse of her as she passed 
between two bushes, and then she stepped right out into the 
open, and, looking into my face, stopped dead. 

By great and unexpected good luck the half-dozen steps the 
tigress took to her right front carried her almost to the exact 
spot at which my rifle was pointing. Had she continued in the 
direction in which she was coming before her last call, my story 



— if written— would have had a different ending, for it would 
have been as impossible to slew the rifle on the rounded top of 
the rock as it would have been to lift and fire it with one hand. 

Owing to the nearness of the tigress, and the fading light, all 
that I could see of her was her head. My first bullet caught her 
under the right eye and the second, fired more by accident 
than with intent, took her in the throat and she came to rest 
with her nose against the rock. The recoil from the right barrel 
loosened my hold on the rock and knocked me off the ledge, 
and the recoil from the left barrel, fired while I was in the air, 
brought the rifle up in violent contact with my jaw and sent me 
heels over head right on top of the men and goats. Once again I 
take my hat off to those four men for, not knowing but what the 
tigress was going to land on them next, they caught me as I fell 
and saved me from injury and my rifle from being broken. 

When I had freed myself from the tangle of human and goat 
legs I took the *275 rifle from the man who was holding it, 
rammed a clip of cartridges into the magazine and sent a 
stream of five bullets singing over the valley and across the 
Sarda into Nepal. Two shots, to the thousands of men in the 
valley and in the surrounding villages who were anxiously 
listening for the sound of my rifle, might mean anything, but 
two shots followed by five more, spaced at regular intervals of 
five seconds, could only be interpreted as conveying one 
message, and that was, that the man-eater was dead. 

I had not spoken to my men from the time we had first heard 
the tigress from the ridge. On my telling them now that she 
was dead and that there was no longer any reason for us to be 
afraid, they did not appear to be able to take in what I was 
saying, so I told them to go up and have a look while I found 
and lit a cigarette. Very cautiously they climbed up to the rock, 
but went no further for, as I have told you, the tigress was 
touching the other side of it. Later in camp that night, while 
sitting round a camp-fire, and relating their experiences to 
relays of eager listeners, their narrative invariably ended up 



with, 'and then the tiger whose roaring had turned our livers 
into water hit the sahib on the head and knocked him down on 
top of us and if you don't believe us, go and look at his face/ A 
mirror is superfluous in camp and even if I had one it could not 
have made the swelling on my jaw, which put me on milk diet 
for several days, look as large and as painful as it felt. 

By the time a sapling had been felled and the tigress lashed to 
it, lights were beginning to show in the Ladhya valley and in all 
the surrounding camps and villages. The four men were very 
anxious to have the honour of carrying the tigress to camp, but 
the task was beyond them; so I left them and set off for help. 

In my three visits to Chuka during the past eight months I had 
been along this path many times by day and always with a 
loaded rifle in my hands, and now I was stumbling down in the 
dark, unarmed, my only anxiety being to avoid a fall. If the 
greatest happiness one can experience is the sudden cessation 
of great pain, then the second greatest happiness is 
undoubtedly the sudden cessation of great fear. One short hour 
previously it would have taken wild elephants to have dragged 
from their homes and camps the men who now, singing and 
shouting, were converging from every direction, singly and in 
groups, on the path leading to Thak. Some of the men of this 
rapidly growing crowd went up the path to help carry in the 
tigress, while others accompanied me on my way to camp, and 
would have carried me had I permitted them. Progress was 
slow, for frequent halts had to be made to allow each group of 
new arrivals to express their gratitude in their own particular 
way. This gave the party carrying the tigress time to catch us 
up, and we entered the village together. I will not attempt to 
describe the welcome my men and I received, or the scenes I 
witnessed at Chuka that night, for having lived the greater part 
of my life in the jungles I have not the ability to paint word- 
pictures. 

A hayrick was dismantled and the tigress laid on it, and an 
enormous bonfire made from driftwood close at hand to light 



up the scene and for warmth, for the night was dark and cold 
with a north wind blowing. Round about midnight my servant, 
assisted by the Headman of Thak and Kunwar Singh, near 
whose house I was camped, persuaded the crowd to return to 
their respective villages and labour camps, telling them they 
would have ample opportunity of feasting their eyes on the 
tigress the following day Before leaving himself, the Headman 
of Thak told me he would send word in the morning to the 
people of Thak to return to their village. This he did, and two 
days later the entire population returned to their homes, and 
have lived in peace ever since. 

After my midnight dinner I sent for Kunwar Singh and told him 
that in order to reach home on the promised date I should have 
to start in a few hours, and that he would have to explain to the 
people in the morning why I had gone. This he promised to do, 
and I then started to skin the tigress. Skinning a tiger with a 
pocket-knife is a long job, but it gives one an opportunity of 
examining the animal that one would otherwise not get, and in 
the case of man-eaters enables one to ascertain, more or less 
accurately, the reason for the animal having become a man- 
eater. 

The tigress was a comparatively young animal and in the 
perfect condition one would expect her to be at the beginning 
of the mating season. Her dark winter coat was without a 
blemish, and in spite of her having so persistently refused the 
meals I had provided for her she was encased in fat. She had 
two old gunshot wounds, neither of which showed on her skin. 
The one in her left shoulder, caused by several pellets of 
homemade buckshot, had become septic, and when healing the 
skin, over quite a large surface, had adhered permanently to 
the flesh. To what extent this wound had incapacitated her it 
would have been difficult to say, but it had evidently taken a 
very long time to heal, and could quite reasonably have been 
the cause of her having become a man-eater. The second 
wound, which was in her right shoulder, had also been caused 
by a charge of buckshot, but had healed without becoming 



septic. These two wounds received over kills in the days before 
she had become a man-eater were quite sufficient reason for 
her not having returned to the human and other kills I had sat 
over. 

After having skinned the tigress I bathed and dressed, and 
though my face was swollen and painful and I had twenty miles 
of rough going before me, I left Chuka walking on air, while the 
thousands of men in and around the valley were peacefully 
sleeping. 

I have come to the end of the jungle stories I set out to tell you 
and I have also come near the end of my man-eater hunting 
career. 

I have had a long spell and count myself fortunate in having 
walked out on my own feet and not been carried out on a 
cradle in the manner and condition of the man of Thak. 

There have been occasions when life has hung by a thread and 
others when a light purse and disease resulting from exposure 
and strain have made the going difficult, but for all these 
occasions I am amply rewarded if my hunting has resulted in 
saving one human life. 



Just Tigers 

I THINK that all sportsmen who have had the opportunity of 
indulging in the twin sports of shooting tigers with a camera 
and shooting them with a rifle will agree with me that the 
difference between these two forms of sport is as great, if not 
greater, than the taking of a trout on light tackle in a snow-fed 
mountain stream, and the killing of a fish on a fixed rod on the 
sun-baked bank of a tank. 

Apart from the difference in cost between shooting with a 
camera and shooting with a rifle, and the beneficial effect it 
has on our rapidly decreasing stock of tigers, the taking of a 
good photograph gives far more pleasure to the sportsman 
than the acquisition of a trophy; and further, while the 
photograph is of interest to all lovers of wild life, the trophy is 
only of interest to the individual who acquired it. As an 
illustration, I would instance Fred Champion. Had Champion 
shot his tigers with a rifle instead of with a camera his trophies 
would long since have lost their hair and been consigned to the 
dustbin, whereas the records made by his camera are a 
constant source of pleasure to him, and are of interest to 
sportsmen in all parts of the world. 

It was looking at the photographs in Champion's book With a 
Camera in Tiger-Land that first gave me the idea of taking 
photographs of tigers. Champion's photographs were taken 
with still camera by flashlight and I decided to go one better 
and try to take tiger pictures with a cine-camera by daylight. 
The gift by a very generous friend of a Bell and Howell 16-mm. 
camera put just the weapon I needed into my hands, and the 
'Freedom of the Forests' which I enjoy enabled me to roam at 
large over a very wide field. For ten years I stalked through 
many hundreds of miles of tiger country, at times being seen off 
by tigers that resented my approaching their kills, and at other 
times being shooed out of the jungle by tigresses that objected 
to my going near their cubs. During this period I learnt a little 
about the habits and ways of tigers, and though I saw tigers on. 



possibly; two hundred occasions I did not succeed in getting 
one satisfactory picture. I exposed films on many occasions, but 
the results were disappointing owing either to overexposure, 
underexposure, obstruction of grass or leaves or cobwebs on 
the lens; and in one case owing to the emulsion on the film 
having been melted while being processed. 

Finally in 1938 I decided to devote the whole winter to making 
one last effort to get a good picture. Having learnt by 
experience that it was not possible to get a haphazard picture 
of a tiger, my first consideration was to find a suitable site, and 
I eventually selected an open ravine fifty yards wide, with a 
tiny stream flowing down the centre of it, and flanked on either 
side by dense tree and scrub jungle. To deaden the sound of my 
camera when taking pictures at close range I blocked the 
stream in several places, making miniature waterfalls a few 
inches high. I then cast round for my tigers, and having located 
seven, in three widely separated areas, started to draw them a 
few yards at a time to my jungle studio. This was a long and a 
difficult job, with many setbacks and disappointments, for the 
area in which I was operating is heavily shot over, and it was 
only by keeping my tigers out of sight that I eventually got 
them to the exact spot where I wanted them. One of the tigers 
for some reason unknown to me left the day after her arrival, 
but not before I had taken a picture of her; the other six I kept 
together and I exposed a thousand feet of film on them. 
Unfortunately it was one of the wettest winters we have ever 
had and several hundred feet of the film were ruined through 
moisture on the lens, underexposure, and packing of the film 
inside the camera due to hurried and careless threading. But, 
even so, I have got approximately six hundred feet of film of 
which I am inordinately proud, for they are a living record of 
six full grown tigers— four males, two of which are over ten 
feet, and two females, one of which is a white tigress— filmed 
in daylight, at ranges varying from ten to sixty feet. 

The whole proceeding from start to finish took four and a half 
months, and during the countless hours I lay near the tiny 



stream and my miniature waterfalls, not one of the tigers ever 
saw me. 

The stalking to within a few feet of six tigers in daylight would 
have been an impossible feat, so they were stalked in the very 
early hours of the morning, before night had gone and daylight 
come— the heavy winter dew making this possible— and were 
filmed as light, and opportunity, offered. 

No matter how clear 16-mm. films may appear when projected 
they do not make good enlargements. However, the 
accompanying photographs will give some idea of my jungle 
studio and the size and condition of the subjects I filmed. 

-END- 



BOOK TWO: 

THF. TF.MPT E TTCFR 

AND 

MORE MAN-FATF.RS 

OF KIJMAON 







The Temple Tiger 

1 

IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR those who have never lived in the 
upper reaches of the Himalayas to have any conception of the 
stranglehold that superstition has on the people who inhabit 
that sparsely populated region. The dividing line between the 
superstitions of simple uneducated people who live on high 
mountains, and the beliefs of sophisticated educated people 
who live at lesser heights, is so faint that it is difficult to 
determine where the one ends and the other begins. If 
therefore you are tempted to laugh at the credulity of the 
actors in the tale I am going to tell, I would ask you to pause 
for a moment and try to define the difference between 
superstition as exemplified in my tale, and your beliefs in the 
faith you have been brought up in. 

Shortly after the Kaiser's war, Robert Bellairs and I were on a 
shooting trip in the interiors of Kumaon and we camped one 
September evening at the foot of Trisul, where we were 
informed that 800 goats were sacrificed each year to the 
demon of Trisul. With us we had fifteen of the keenest and the 
most cheerful hillmen I have ever been associated with on 
a shikar. One of these men, Bala Singh, a Garhwali, had been 
with me for years and had accompanied me on many 
expeditions. It was his pride and pleasure when on shikar to 
select and carry the heaviest of my loads and, striding at the 
head of the other men, enliven the march with snatches of 
song. Around the camp-lire at night the men always sang part- 
songs before going to sleep, and during that first night, at the 
foot of Trisul, the singing lasted longer than usual and was 
accompanied by clapping of hands, shouting, and the beating of 
tin cans. 

It had been our intention to camp at this spot and explore the 
country around for baral and thar, and we were very surprised 
as we sat down to breakfast next morning to see our men 
making preparations to strike camp. On asking for an 



explanation we were told that the site we had camped on was 
not suitable: that it was damp; that the drinking water was bad; 
that fuel was difficult to get; and, finally that there was a better 
site two miles away. 

I had six Garhwalis to carry my luggage and I noticed that it 
was being made up into five head-loads, and that Bala Singh 
was sitting apart near the camp-fire with a blanket over his 
head and shoulders. After breakfast I walked over to him, and 
noted as I did so that all the other men had stopped work and 
were watching me very intently. Bala Singh saw me coming and 
made no attempt to greet me, which was very unusual, and to 
all my questions he returned the one answer— that he was not 
ill. That day we did our two-mile march in silence, Bala Singh 
bringing up the rear and moving like a man who was walking in 
his sleep, or who was under the influence of drugs. 

It was now quite apparent that whatever had happened to Bala 
Singh was affecting the other fourteen men, for they were 
performing their duties without their usual cheerfulness, and 
all of them had a strained, and frightened look on their faces. 
While the 40-lb tent Robert and I shared was being erected, I 
took my Garhwali servant Mothi Singh— who had been with me 
for twenty-five years— aside and demanded to be told what was 
wrong with Bala Singh. After a lot of hedging and evasive 
answers I eventually got Mothi Singh's story, which, when it 
came, was short and direct. 'While we were sitting round the 
camp-fire last night and singing,' Mothi Singh said, the 'demon 
of Trisul entered Bala Singh's mouth and he swallowed him'. 
Mothi Singh went on to say that they had shouted and beaten 
tin cans to try to drive the demon out of Bala Singh, but that 
they had not succeeded in doing so, and that now nothing could 
be done about it. 

Bala Singh was sitting apart, with the blanket still draped over 
his head. He was out of earshot of the other men, so, going 
over to him, I asked him to tell me what had happened the 
previous night. For a long minute Bala Singh looked up at me 



with eyes full of distress, and then in a hopeless tone of voice 
he said: 'Of what use is it. Sahib, for me to tell you what 
happened last night, for you will not believe me. 1 'Have I ever, 1 I 
asked, 'disbelieved you?' 'No,' he said, 'no, you have never 
disbelieved me, but this is a matter that you will not 
understand.' 'Whether I understand it or not, 1 I said, 'I want you 
to tell me exactly what happened.' After a long silence Bala 
Singh said: 'Very well. Sahib, I will tell you what happened. You 
know that in our hill-songs it is customary for one man to sing 
the verse, and for all the other men present to join in the 
chorus. Well, while I was singing a verse of one of our songs 
last night the demon of Trisul jumped into my mouth, and 
though I tried to eject him, he slipped down my throat into my 
stomach. The other men saw my struggle with the demon, for 
the fire was burning brightly, and. they tried to drive him away 
by shouting and beating tin cans; but,' he added with a sob, 

'the demon would not go.' 'Where is the demon now?' I asked. 
Placing his hand on the pit of his stomach, Bala Singh 
answered with great conviction, 'He is here. Sahib, here; I can 
feel him moving about. 1 

Robert had spent the day prospecting the ground to the west of 
our camp and had shot a thar, of which he had seen several. 
After dinner we sat long into the night reviewing the situation. 
We had planned for, and looked forward to, this shoot for many 
months. It had taken Robert seven days' and me ten days' hard 
walking to reach our shooting ground, and on the night of our 
arrival Bala Singh had swallowed the demon of Trisul. What 
our personal opinions were on this subject did not matter, but 
what did matter was that every man in camp was convinced 
that Bala Singh had a demon in his stomach, and they were 
frightened of him and were shunning his company. To carry on 
a month's shoot under these conditions was not possible, and 
Robert very reluctantly agreed with me that the only thing to 
be done was for me to return to Naini Tal with Bala Singh, 
while he carried on with the shoot alone. So next morning I 
packed up my things, and after an early breakfast with Robert, 



set off on my ten-day walk back to Naini Tal. 

Bala Singh, a perfect specimen of a man of about thirty years of 
age, had left Naini Tal full of the joy of life; now he returned 
silent, with a strained look in his eyes, and with the appearance 
of one who had lost all interest in life. My sisters, one of whom 
had been a medical missionary, did all they could for him. 
Friends from far and near came to visit him, but he just sat at 
the door of his house, never speaking unless spoken to. The 
civil surgeon of Naini Tal, Colonel Cooke, a man of great 
experience and a close friend of the family; came to visit Bala 
Singh at my request. His verdict after a long and painstaking 
examination was that Bala Singh was in perfect physical 
condition, and that he could ascribe no reason for the man's 
apparent depression. 

A few days later I had a brainwave. There was in Naini Tal at 
that time a very eminent Indian doctor and I thought if I could 
get him to examine Bala Singh and, after he had done so, tell 
him about the demon and persuade him to assure Bala Singh 
that there was no demon in his stomach, he would be able to 
cure him of his trouble, for in addition to being a Hindu, the 
doctor was himself a hillman. My brainwave, however, did not 
work out as I had hoped and anticipated, for as soon as he saw 
the sick man the doctor appeared to get suspicious and when in 
reply to some shrewd questions he learnt from Bala Singh that 
the demon of Trisul was in his stomach, he stepped away from 
him hurriedly and turning to me said, 'I am sorry you sent for 
me, for I can do nothing for this man.' 

There were two men from Bala Singh's village in Naini Tal. 

Next day I sent for them. They knew what was wrong with Bala 
Singh for they had come to see him several times, and at my 
request they agreed to take him home. Provided with funds the 
three men started on their eight-day journey next morning. 
Three weeks later the two men returned and made their report 
to me. 


Bala Singh had accomplished the journey without any trouble. 



On the night of his arrival home, and while his relatives and 
friends were gathered around him, he had suddenly announced 
to the assembly that the demon wanted to be released to return 
to Trisul, and that the only way this could be accomplished was 
for him to die. 'So,' my informants concluded, 'Bala Singh just 
lay down and died, and next morning we assisted at his 
cremation. 1 

Superstition, I am convinced, is a mental complaint similar to 
measles in that it attacks an individual or a community while 
leaving others immune. I therefore do not claim any credit for 
not contracting, while living on the upper reaches of the 
Himalayas, the virulent type of superstition that Bala Singh 
died of. But though I claim I am not superstitious, I can give no 
explanation for the experience I met with at the bungalow 
while hunting the Champawat tiger and the scream I heard 
coming from the deserted Thak village. Nor can I give any 
explanation for my repeated failures while engaged in one of 
the most interesting tiger hunts I have ever indulged in, which 

1 shall now relate. 

2 

No one who has visited Dabidhura is ever likely to forget the 
view that is to be obtained from the Rest House built near the 
summit of 'God's Mountain' by one who, quite evidently, was a 
lover of scenery From the veranda of the little three-roomed 
house, the hill falls steeply away to the valley of the Panar river. 
Beyond this valley, the hills rise ridge upon ridge until they 
merge into the eternal snows which, until the advent of 
aircraft, formed an impenetrable barrier between India and her 
hungry northern neighbours. 

A bridle-road running from Naini Hal, the administrative 
headquarters of Kumaon, to Loharghat, an outlying subdivision 
on her eastern border, passes through Dabidhura, and a branch 
of this road connects Dabidhura with Almora. I was hunting the 
Panar man-eating leopard— about which I shall tell you later- 
in the vicinity of this latter road when I was informed by a road 


overseer, on his way to Almora, that the leopard had killed a 
man at Dabidhura. So to Dabidhura I went. 

The western approach to Dabidhura is up one of the steepest 
roads in Kumaon. The object the man who designed this road 
had in view was to get to the top by the shortest route possible, 
and this he accomplished by dispensing with hairpin bends and 
running his road straight up the face of the eight-thousand-foot 
mountain. After panting up this road on a hot afternoon in 
April, I was sitting on the veranda of the Rest House drinking 
gallons of tea and feasting my eyes on the breathtaking view, 
when the priest of Dabidhura came to see me. When two years 
previously I had been hunting the Champawat man-eater, I had 
made friends with this frail old man, who officiated at the little 
temple nestling in the shadow of the great rock that had made 
Dabidhura a place of pilgrimage, and for whose presence in 
that unusual place I shall hazard no guess. When passing the 
temple a few minutes earlier I had made the customary 
offering which had been acknowledged by a nod by the old 
priest who was at his devotions. These devotions finished, the 
priest crossed the road that runs between the temple and the 
Rest House and accepting a cigarette sat down on the floor of 
the veranda with his back against the wall for a comfortable 
chat. He was a friendly old man with plenty of time on his 
hands, and as I had done all the walking I wanted to that day, 
we sat long into the evening chatting and smoking. 

From the priest I learnt that I had been misinformed by the 
road overseer about the man alleged to have been killed at 
Dabidhura the previous night by the man-eater. The alleged 
victim, a herdsman on his way from Almora to a village south of 
Dabidhura, had been the priest's guest the previous night. 

After the evening meal the herdsman had elected, against the 
priest's advice, to sleep on the chabutra (platform) of the 
temple. Round about midnight, when the rock was casting a 
shadow over the temple, the man-eater crept up and, seizing 
the man's ankles, attempted to drag him off the platform. 
Awakening with a yell, the man grabbed a smouldering bit of 



wood from the nearby fire, and beat oft the leopard. His yell 
brought the priest and several other men to his rescue and the 
combined force drove the animal away The man's wounds were 
not serious, and after they had received rough-and-ready 
treatment at the hands of the bania, whose shop was near the 
temple the herdsman continued his journey 

On the evidence of the priest I decided to remain at Dabidhura. 
The temple and the bania's shop were daily visited by men 
from the surrounding villages. These men would spread the 
news of my arrival and— knowing where I was to be found— I 
would immediately be informed of any kills of human beings, or 
of animals, that might take place in the area. 

As the old priest got up to leave me that evening I asked him if 
it would be possible for me to get some shooting in the locality, 
for my men had been without meat for many days and there 
was none to be purchased at Dabidhura. 'Yes, 1 he answered, 
'there is the temple tiger.' On my assuring him that I had no 
desire to shoot his tiger he rejoined with a laugh, 'I have no 
objection. Sahib, to your trying to shoot this tiger, but neither 
you nor anyone else will ever succeed in killing it.' And that is 
how I came to hear of the Dabidhura temple tiger, which 
provided me with one of the most 
interesting shikar experiences I have ever had. 

The morning following my arrival at Dabidhura I went down the 
Loharghat road to see if I could find any trace of the man-eater, 
or learn anything about it in the village adjoining the road, for 
the leopard was alleged to have gone in that direction after its 
attack on the man at the temple. On my return to the Rest 
House for a late lunch I found a man in conversation with my 
servant. This man informed me he had learnt from the priest 
that I wanted to do some shooting and he said he could show 
me a jarao— the hillman's name for sambhar— with horns as 
big as the branches of an oak tree. Hill sambhar do on 
occasions grow very fine horns— one had been shot in Kumaon 


some time previously with horns measuring forty-seven inches 
— and as a big animal would not only provide my men with 
meat but would also provide a meat ration for all at Dabidhura, 

I told the man I would accompany him after lunch. 

Some months previously I had been to Calcutta on a short visit, 
and one morning walked into Manton's, the gunmaker's shop. 
On a glass showcase near the door was a rifle. I was looking at 
the weapon when the manager, who was an old friend of mine, 
came up. He informed me that the rifle, a -275 by Westley 
Richards, was a new model which the makers were anxious to 
introduce on the Indian market for hill shooting. The rifle was a 
beauty and the manager had little difficulty in persuading me 
to buy it on the understanding that if it did not suit me I would 
be at liberty to return it. So when I set out with my village 
friend that evening to shoot his jarao with horns as big as the 
branches of an oak tree, I was carrying my brand-new rifle. 

To the south of Dabidhura the hill is less steep than it is to the 
north and we had proceeded in this direction through oak and 
scrub jungle for about two miles when we came to a grassy 
knoll with an extensive view of the valley below. Pointing to a 
small patch of grass— surrounded by dense jungle— on the 
left-hand side of the valley, my guide informed me that 
the jarao came out to graze on this patch of grass morning and 
evening. He further informed me that there was a footpath on 
the right-hand side of the valley which he used when on his 
way to or from Dabidhura, and that it was from this path he 
was accustomed to seeing the jarao. The rifle I was carrying 
was sighted to five hundred yards and guaranteed to be dead 
accurate, and as the distance between the path and 
the jama's feeding ground appeared to be only about three 
hundred yards, I decided to go down the path and wait for a 
shot. 

While we had been talking I had noticed some vultures circling 
to our left front. On drawing my companion's attention to them 
he informed me there was a small village in a fold of the hill in 



that direction and suggested that the vultures were possibly 
interested in some domestic animal that had died in the village. 
However, he said we would soon know what had attracted the 
birds, for our way lay through the village. The 'village' 
consisted of a single grass hut, a cattle shed, and an acre or so 
of terraced fields from which the crops had recently been cut. 

In one of these fields, separated from the hut and cattle shed 
by a ten-foot wide rainwater channel, vultures were tearing the 
last shreds of flesh from the skeleton of some large animal. A 
man walked out of the hut as we approached and, after 
greeting us, asked where I had come from and when I had 
arrived. On my telling him that I had come from Naini Tal to try 
to shoot the man-eating leopard and that I had arrived at 
Dabidhura the previous day, he expressed great regret at not 
having known of my arrival. 'For you could then,' he said, 'have 
shot the tiger that killed my cow.' He went on to tell me that he 
had tethered his fifteen head of cattle in the field, on which the 
vultures were pulling about the skeleton, the previous night, to 
fertilize it, and that during the night a tiger had come and 
killed one of the cows. He had no firearms and as there was no 
one within reach to whom he could appeal to shoot the tiger, he 
had gone to a village where a man lived who had the contract 
for collecting hides and skins in that area. This man had 
removed the hide of the cow two hours before my arrival, and 
the vultures had then carried out their function. When I asked 
the man whether he had known that there was a tiger in the 
locality and, if so, why he had tethered his cattle out in the 
open at night, he surprised me by saying there had always been 
a tiger on the Dabidhura hill, but that up to the previous night 
it had never molested cattle. 

As I moved away from the hut the man asked me where I was 
going and when I told him I was going to try to shoot 
the jarao on the far side of the valley, he begged me to leave 
the jarao alone for the present and to shoot the tiger. 'My 
holding is small and the land poor, as you can see,' he said, 'and 
if the tiger kills my cows, on which I depend for a living, my 



family and I will starve. 1 

While we had been talking, a woman had come up the hill with 
a gharra of water on her head, followed a little later by a girl 
carrying a bundle of green grass and a boy carrying a bundle of 
dry sticks: four people living on an acre or so of poor land and 
a few pints of milk— for hill cattle give little milk— sold to 
the bania at Dabidhura. Little wonder, then, that the man was 
so anxious for me to shoot the tiger. 

The vultures had destroyed the kill. This did not matter, 
however, for there was no heavy cover near the field where the 
tiger could have lain up and seen the vultures at their work, so 
he would be almost certain to return, for he had not been 
disturbed at his feed the previous night. My guide was also 
keen on my trying to shoot the tiger in preference to 
his jarao, so, telling the two men to sit down, I set off to try to 
find out in which direction the tiger had gone, for there were 
no trees on which I could sit near the field, and it was my 
intention to intercept the tiger on its way back. The hill was 
criss-crossed with cattle paths but the ground was too hard to 
show pug marks, and after circling round the village twice I 
eventually tried the rainwater channel. Here on the soft damp 
ground I found the pug marks of a big male tiger. These pug- 
marks showed that the tiger had gone up the channel after his 
feed, so it was reasonable to assume that he would return the 
same way. Growing out of the bank, on the same side of the 
channel as the hut and about thirty yards from it, was a 
gnarled and stunted oak tree smothered by a wild rose creeper. 
Laying down the rifle, I stepped from the bank on to the tree, 
which was leaning out over the channel, and found there was a 
reasonably comfortable seat on the top of the creeper. 

Rejoining the two men at the hut I told them I was going back 
to the Rest House for my heavy rifle, a double-barrelled -500 
express using modified cordite. My guide very sportingly 
offered to save me this trouble, so after instructing him I sat 
down with the villager at the door of his hut and listened to the 



tales he had to tell of a poor but undaunted man's fight against 
nature and wild animals, to keep a grass roof above his head. 
When I asked him why he did not leave this isolated place and 
try to make a living elsewhere, he said simply. This is my 
home.' 

The sun was near setting when I saw two men coming down 
the hill towards the hut. Neither of them had a rifle, but Bala 
Singh— one of the best men who ever stepped out of Garhwal, 
and of whose tragic death some years later I have already told 
you— was carrying a lantern. On reaching me Bala Singh said 
he had not brought my heavy rifle because the cartridges for it 
were locked up in my suitcase and I had forgotten to send the 
key. Well, the tiger would have to be shot with my new rifle, 
and it could not have a better christening. 

Before taking my seat on the tree I told the owner of the hut 
that my success would depend on his keeping his two children, 
a girl of eight and a boy of six, quiet, and that his wife would 
have to defer cooking the evening meal until I had shot the 
tiger, or until I decided the tiger was not coming. 

My instructions to Bala Singh were to keep the inmates of the 
hut quiet, light the lantern when I whistled, and then await my 
further orders. 

The vesper songs of the multitude of birds in the valley were 
hushed as the red glow from the setting sun died off the hills. 
Twilight deepened and a horned owl hooted on the hill above 
me. There would be a short period of semi-darkness before the 
moon rose. The time had now come, and the inmates of the hut 
were as silent as the dead. I was gripping the rifle and 
straining my eyes on the ground under me when the tiger, who 
had avoided passing under my tree, arrived at his kill and was 
angry at what he found. In a low muttering voice he cursed the 
vultures who, though they had departed two hours earlier, had 
left their musky smell on the ground they had fouled. For two, 
three, possibly four minutes he continued to mutter to himself, 
and then there was silence. The light was getting stronger. 



Another few minutes and the moon rose over the brow of the 
hill, flooding my world with light. The bones picked clean by 
the vultures were showing white in the moonlight, and 
nowhere was the tiger to be seen. Moistening my lips, which 
excitement had dried, I gave a low whistle. Bala Singh was on 
the alert and I heard him ask the owner of the hut for a light 
from the fire. Through the crevices of the grass hut I saw a 
glimmer of light, which grew stronger as the lantern was lit. 

The light moved across the hut and Bala Singh pulled open the 
door and stood on the threshold awaiting my further orders. 
With the exception of that one low whistle, I had made no 
sound or movement from the time I had taken my seat on the 
tree. And now, when I looked down, there was the tiger 
standing below me, in brilliant moonlight, looking over his right 
shoulder at Bala Singh. The distance between the muzzle of my 
rifle and the tiger's head was about five feet, and the thought 
flashed through my mind that the cordite would probably singe 
his hair. The ivory foresight of my rifle was on the exact spot of 
the tiger's heart— where I knew my bullet would kill him 
instantaneously— when I gently pressed the trigger. The 
trigger gave under the pressure, and nothing happened. 

Heavens! How incredibly careless I had been. I distinctly 
remembered having put a clip of five cartridges in the 
magazine when I took my seat on the tree, but quite evidently 
when I pushed the bolt home it had failed to convey a cartridge 
from the magazine into the chamber, and this I had omitted to 
observe. Had the rifle been old and worn it might still have 
been possible to rectify my mistake. But the rifle was new and 
as I raised the lever to draw back the bolt there was a loud 
metallic click, and in one bound the tiger was up the bank and 
out of sight. Turning my head to see how Bala Singh had 
reacted, I saw him step back into the hut and close the door. 

There was now no longer any need for silence and as Bala 
Singh came up at my call, to help me off the tree, I drew back 
the bolt of the rifle with the object of unloading the magazine 
and, as I did so, I noticed that, the extractor at the end of the 



bolt held a cartridge. So the rifle had been loaded after all and 
the safety-catch off. Why then had the rifle not fired when I 
pulled the trigger? Too late, I knew the reason. One of the 
recommendations stressed by Manton's manager when 
showing me the rifle was that it had a double pull off. Never 
having handled a rifle with this so-called improvement, I did 
not know it was necessary, after the initial pull had taken up 
the slack, to pull the trigger a second time to release the 
striker. When I explained the reason for my failure to Bala 
Singh, he blamed himself, 'for', said he, 'if I had brought your 
heavy rifle andthe suitcase this would not have happened 1 . I 
was inclined to agree with him at the time, but as the days 
went by I was not so sure that even with the heavy rifle I would 
have been able to kill the tiger that evening. 

4 

Another long walk next morning, to try to get news of the man- 
eater, and when I returned to the Rest House I was greeted by 
a very agitated man who informed me that the tiger had Just 
killed one of his cows. He had been grazing his cattle on the far 
side of the valley from where I sat the previous evening, when 
a tiger appeared and killed a red cow that had calved a few 
days previously. 'And now,' he said, 'the heifer calf will die, for 
none of my other cows are in milk. 1 

Luck had been with the tiger the previous evening but his luck 
could not last indefinitely, and for the killing of this cow he 
would have to die, for cattle are scarce in the hills and the loss 
of a milch cow to a poor man was a serious matter. The man 
had no anxiety about the rest of his small herd, which had 
stampeded back to his village, so he was willing to wait while I 
had a meal. At 1 p.m. we set out, the man leading, I on his 
heels, and two of my men following with material for making 
a machan. 

From an open patch of ground on the hillside my guide pointed 
out the lay of the land. His cattle had been grazing on a short 
stretch of grass a quarter of a mile below the ridge, when the 


tiger, coming up from the direction of the valley, had killed his 
cow. The rest of the herd had stampeded up the hill and over 
the ridge to his village, which was on the far side. Our shortest 
way was across the valley and up the other side, but I did not 
want to risk disturbing the tiger, so we skirted round the head 
of the valley to approach from above the spot where the cow 
had been killed. Between the ridge over which the cattle had 
stampeded and the spot where they had been grazing, was 
more or less open tree jungle. The tracks of the running 
animals had bitten deep into the soft loamy earth, and it was 
easy to follow these tracks back to where they had started. 

Here there was a big pool of blood with a drag-mark leading 
away from it. The drag led across the hill for 200 yards to a 
deep and well-wooded ravine, with a trickle of water in it. Up 
this ravine the tiger had taken his kill. 

The cow had been killed at about 10 a.m. on open ground, and 
the tiger's first anxiety would have been to remove it to some 
secluded spot where it would be hidden from prying eyes. So 
he had dragged it up the ravine and, after depositing it in a 
place he knew of, he had, as his pug-marks showed, gone down 
the ravine into the valley below. In an area in which human 
beings and cattle are moving about, it is unwise to predict 
where a tiger will be lying up, for the slightest disturbance may 
make him change his position. So, though the pug-marks led 
down the ravine, the three men and I very cautiously followed 
the drag up the ravine. 

Two hundred yards below the ridge along which we had come, 
rainwater had scooped out a big hole in the hillside. Here the 
ravine started. The hole, which at the upper end had a sheer 
drop into it of fifteen feet, had been made many years 
previously and was now partly overgrown with oak and ash 
saplings ten to twelve feet tall. Between these saplings and the 
fifteen-foot drop was a small open space on which the tiger had 
deposited his kill. I could sympathize with the owner of the cow 
when he told me with tears in his eyes that the fine animal that 
lay dead before us had been bred by him and that it was a 



special favourite. No portion of the animal had been touched, 
the tiger having evidently brought it here to eat at his leisure. 

A place had now to be found in which to sit. There were several 
big oak trees on either side of the ravine, but none overlooked 
the kill and all of them were unclimbable. Thirty yards below 
the kill and on the left-hand side of the ravine was a small stout 
holly tree. The branches were growing out at right angles to 
the trunk, and six feet above ground there was a strong enough 
branch for me to sit on and another on which to rest my feet. 
The three men protested strongly against my sitting so close to 
the ground. However, there was no other suitable place for me 
to sit, so the holly tree it would have to be. Before sending the 
men away I instructed them to go to the hut where I had been 
the previous evening, and to wait there until I called to them, 
or until I joined them. The distance across the valley was about 
half a mile and though the men would not be able to see either 
me or the kill, I was able to see the hut through the leaves of 
the holly tree. 

The men left me at 4 p.m. and I settled down on the holly 
branch for what I anticipated would be a long wait, for the hill 
faced west and the tiger would probably not be on the move 
much before sundown. To the left my field of vision— through 
the holly leaves— extended down the ravine for fifty yards. In 
front I had a clear view into the ravine, which was about ten 
feet deep and twenty feet wide, and of the hill facing me on 
which there were outcrops of rock but no trees. To the right I 
had a clear view up to the ridge but I could not see the kill, 
which was hidden by the thick growth of saplings. Behind me 
was a dense thicket of ringalswhich extended down to the level 
of my tree and further helped to mask the kill. The tiger after 
depositing his kill in the hole, made by rainwater, had gone 
down the ravine and it was reasonable to assume that when he 
returned he would come by the same route. So I concentrated 
all my attention on the ravine, intending to shoot the tiger 
when he was at right angles to me. That I could kill him at that 
short range I had no doubt whatsoever and to make quite sure 



of getting in a second shot, if it was necessary, I cocked both 
hammers of my rifle. 

There were sambhar, kakar, and langur in the jungle and a 
great number of pheasants, magpies, babblers, thrushes, and 
jays, all of which call on seeing a member of the cat family, so I 
thought I would receive ample warning of the tiger's coming. 
But here I was wrong, for without having heard a single alarm 
call, I suddenly heard the tiger at his kill. After going down the 
ravine, possibly for a drink, the tiger had skirted round the 
thicket of ringals and approached his kill without passing me. 
This did not worry me unduly for tigers are restless at a kill in 
daylight, and I felt sure that sooner or later the tiger would 
show up on the open ground in front of me. He had been eating 
for about fifteen minutes, tearing off great chunks of flesh, 
when I caught sight of a bear coming along the crest of the hill 
from left to right. He was a great big Himalayan black bear, 
and was strolling along as though it did not matter to him how 
long he took to get from here to there. Suddenly he stopped, 
turned facing downhill, and lay flat. After a minute or two he 
raised his head, snuffed the wind, and again lay flat. The wind, 
as always in daylight in the hills, was blowing uphill and the 
bear had got the scent of flesh and blood, mingled with the 
scent of tiger. I was a little to the right of the kill, so he had not 
got my scent. Presently he got to his feet and, with the bent 
legs and body held close to the ground, started to stalk the 
tiger. 

It was a revelation to me in animal stalking to see that bear 
coming down the hill. He had possibly two hundred yards to go 
and though he was not built for stalking, as tigers and leopards 
are, he covered the distance as smoothly as a snake and as 
silently as a shadow. The nearer he got the more cautious he 
became. I could see the lip of the fifteen-foot drop into the hole, 
and when the bear got to within a few feet of this spot he drew 
himself along with belly to ground. Waiting until the tiger was 
eating with great gusto, the bear very slowly projected his head 
over the lip of the hole and looked down, and then as slowly 



drew his head back. Excitement with me had now reached the 
stage when the whole of my body was trembling, and my mouth 
and throat were dry. 

On two occasions I have seen Himalayan bears walk off with 
tigers' kills. On both occasions the tigers were not present. And 
on two occasions I have seen bears walk up to feeding leopards 
and, after shooing them off, carry the kills away. But on this 
occasion the tiger— and a big male at that— was present at his 
kill and, further, he was not an animal to be shooed away like a 
leopard. At the back of my mind was the thought that surely 
this bear would not be so foolish as to try to dispossess the king 
of the jungle of his kill. But that was just what the bear 
appeared to intend doing, and his opportunity came when the 
tiger was cracking a bone. Whether the bear had been waiting 
for this moment I do not know; anyway, while the tiger was 
crunching the bone, the bear drew himself to the edge and, 
gathering his feet under him, launched himself into the hole 
with a mighty scream. The object of the scream I imagine was 
to intimidate the tiger, but so far from having this effect it 
appeared to infuriate him, for the bear's mighty scream was 
answered by an even mightier roar from the tiger. 

Fights in the wild are very rare and this is only the second case 
I know of different species of animals fighting for the sake of 
fighting and not for the purpose of one using the other as food. 

I did not see the fight, for the reasons I have given, but I heard 
every detail of it. Waged in a hollow of restricted area the 
sound was terrifying and I was thankful that the fight was a 
straight one between two contestants who were capable of 
defending themselves, and not a three-cornered one in which I 
was involved. Time stands still when every drop of blood racing 
through a rapidly beating heart is tingling with excitement. The 
fight may have lasted three minutes, or it may have lasted 
longer. Anyway, when the tiger considered he had administered 
sufficient chastisement he broke off the engagement and came 
along the open ground in front of me at a fast gallop, closely 
followed by the still screaming bear. Just as I was aligning the 



sights of my rifle on the tiger's left shoulder he turned sharp to 
the left and leaping the twenty-foot-wide ravine, landed at my 
feet. While he was still in the air I depressed the muzzle of the 
rifle and fired, as I thought, straight into his back. My shot was 
greeted with an angry grunt as the tiger crashed into 
the ringals behind me. For a few yards he carried on and then 
there was silence; shot through the heart and died in his 
tracks, I thought. 

A -500 modified cordite rifle fired anywhere makes a 
considerable noise, but here, in the ravine, it sounded like a 
cannon. The detonation, however, had not the least effect on 
the maddened bear. Following close on the heels of the tiger he 
did not attempt to leap the ravine, as the tiger had done. 
Storming down one bank he came up the other straight 
towards me. I had no wish to shoot an animal that had the 
courage to drive a tiger off his kill, but to have let that 
screaming fury come any nearer would have been madness, so, 
when he was a few feet from me, I put the bullet of the left 
barrel into his broad forehead. Slowly he slid down the bank on 
his stomach, until his haunches met the opposite bank. 

Where a moment earlier the jungle had resounded with angry 
strife and the detonations of a heavy rifle, there was now 
silence, and when my heart had resumed its normal beat, my 
thoughts turned to a soothing smoke. Laying the rifle across 
my knees I put both hands into my pockets to feel for cigarette 
case and matches. At that moment I caught sight of a 
movement on my right and, turning my head, saw the tiger 
unhurriedly cantering along on the open ground over which he 
had galloped a minute or two earlier and looking not at me, but 
at his dead enemy. 

I know that in relating these events as they occurred, 
sportsmen will accuse me of rank bad shooting and gross 
carelessness. I have no defence to make against the accusation 
of bad shooting, but I do not plead guilty to carelessness. When 
I fired, as I thought, into the tiger's back, I was convinced I was 



delivering a fatal wound, and the angry response followed by 
the mad rush and sudden cessation of sound were ample 
justification for thinking the tiger had died in his tracks. My 
second shot had killed the bear outright so there was no 
necessity— while I was still on the tree— to reload the rifle 
before laying it across my knees. 

Surprise at seeing the tiger alive and unhurt lost me a second 
or two, and thereafter I acted quickly. The rifle was of the 
under-lever model; the lever being held in position by two lugs 
on the trigger guard. This made the rapid loading of the rifle 
difficult, and, further, the spare cartridges were in my trousers 
pocket; easy to get at when standing up, but not so easy when 
sitting on a thin branch. Whether the tiger knew the bear was 
dead, or whether he was just keeping an eye on it to avoid a 
flank attack, I do not know. Anyway, he carried on across the 
face of the steep hill at a slow canter and had reached a spot 
forty yards away— which I can best describe as eleven o'clock 
— and was passing a great slab of rock when, with only one 
barrel loaded, I put up the rifle and fired. At my shot he reared 
up, fell over sideways, made a bad landing, scrambled to his 
feet, and cantered on round the shoulder of the hill with his tail 
in the air. The nickel-cased soft-nosed bullet with steel base 
had struck the rock a few inches from the tiger's face and the 
blow-back had thrown him off his balance but had done him no 
harm. 

After a quiet smoke I stepped down from the holly tree and 
went to have a look at the bear, who, I found, was even bigger 
than I had at first thought. His self-sought fight with the tiger 
had been a very real one, for blood from a number of deep cuts 
was seeping through the thick fur on his neck and in several 
places his scalp was torn right down to the bone. These wounds 
in themselves would have mattered little to a tough animal like 
a bear, but what did matter and what had annoyed him was the 
injury to his nose. All males resent being struck on the nose, 
and not only had the bear been struck on that tender spot but 
insult had been added to injury by his nose being torn in half. 



Reason enough for him to have chased the tiger with murder in 
his eyes, and for him to have ignored the report of my heavy 
rifle. 

There was not sufficient time for me to call up my men to skin 
the bear, so I set off to collect them at the hut and get back to 
the Rest House before nightfall, for somewhere in that area 
there was a man-eater. My men, and the dozen or so villagers 
who had collected at the hut, were too intent on gazing across 
the valley to observe my approach, and when I walked in 
among them, they were dumb with amazement. Bala Singh was 
the first to recover speech, and when I heard his story I was 
not surprised that the assembled men had looked at me as one 
returned from the dead. 'We advised you,' Bala Singh said, 'not 
to sit so close to the ground, and when we heard your first 
scream, followed by the tiger's roar, we were convinced that 
yon had been pulled out of the tree and that you were fighting 
for your life with the tiger. Then, when the tiger stopped 
roaring and you continued to scream, we thought the tiger was 
carrying you away. Later we heard two reports from your rifle, 
followed by a third, and we were greatly mystified, for we could 
not understand how a man who was being carried away by a 
tiger could fire his rifle. And while we were consulting with 
these men what we should do, you suddenly appeared and we 
became speechless.' To men keyed-up and listening for sounds 
from where a tiger was being sat up for, the scream of a bear 
could easily be mistaken for the scream of a human being, for 
the two are very similar and at a distance would not be 
distinguishable from one another. 

Bala Singh got a cup of tea ready for me while I told the men 
about the fight they had heard and about the bear I had shot. 
Bear's fat is greatly valued as a cure for rheumatism, and the 
men were delighted when I told them I did not want the fat and 
that they could share it with their friends. Next morning I set 
out to skin the bear, accompanied by a crowd of men who were 
anxious not only to get a share of the fat but also to see the 
animal that had fought a tiger. I have never measured or 



weighed a bear but have seen quite a few, and the one I 
skinned that morning was the biggest and the fattest 
Himalayan bear I have ever seen. When the fat and the other 
prized parts of the bear had been divided, a very happy throng 
of men turned their faces to Dabidhura, and the happiest and 
the most envied of all was Bala Singh who proudly carried, 
strapped to his back, the bear's skin I had given him. 

The tiger did not return to finish his interrupted meal, and by 
evening the vultures had picked clean the bones of the cow and 
the bear. 

5 

Skinning a bear encased in fat is a very messy job, and as I 
plodded back to the Rest House for a hot bath and a late 
breakfast I met a very agitated forest guard, whose 
headquarters were at Dabidhura. He had been at an outlying 
beat the previous night and on his return to Dabidhura that 
morning had heard at the bania's shop about the bear I had 
shot. Being in urgent need of bear's fat for his father, who was 
crippled with rheumatism, he was hurrying to try to get a share 
of the fat when he ran into a herd of stampeding cattle, 
followed by a boy who informed him that a tiger had killed one 
of his cows. The forest guard had a rough idea where the cattle 
had been grazing when attacked by the tiger, so while Bala 
Singh and the other men carried onto Dabidhura I set off with 
him to try to find the kill. Uphill and downhill we went for two 
miles or more until we came to a small valley. It was in this 
valley that the forest guard thought the cow-had been killed. 

There had been an auction of condemned stores at the Gurkha 
depot at Almora a few days previously, and my companion had 
treated himself to a pair of army boots many sizes too big for 
his feet. In these he had clumped ahead of me until we came to 
the lip of the valley. Here I made him remove his boots and 
when I saw the condition of his feet I marvelled that a man who 
had gone barefoot all his life had, for the sake of vanity, 
endured such torture. 'I bought big boots, 1 he told me, 'because 


I thought they would shrink. 1 

The boat-shaped valley some five acres in extent, was like a 
beautiful park dotted over with giant oak trees. On the side 
from which I approached it the ground sloped gently down and 
was free of bushes, but on the far side the hill went up more 
steeply with a few scattered bushes on it. I stood on the lip of 
the valley for a few minutes scanning every foot of ground in 
my field of vision without seeing anything suspicious, and then 
went down the grassy slope followed by the forest guard, now 
walking silently on bare feet. As I approached the flat ground 
on the floor of the valley I saw that the dead leaves and dry 
twigs over a considerable area had been scratched together, 
and piled into a great heap. Though no part of the cow was 
visible I knew that under this pile of dead matter the tiger had 
hidden his kill, and very foolishly I did not inform my 
companion of this fact, for he told me later that he did not 
know that tigers were in the habit of hiding their kills. When a 
tiger hides his kill it is usually an indication that he does not 
intend lying up near it, but it is not safe to assume this always. 
So, though I had scanned the ground before entering the valley, 
I again stood perfectly still while I had another look. 

A little beyond the piled-up leaves and twigs the hill went up at 
an angle of forty-five degrees, and forty yards up the hillside 
there was a small clump of bushes. As I was looking at these I 
saw the tiger, who was lying on a small bit of flat ground with 
his feet towards me, turn over and present his back to me. I 
could see part of his head, and a three-inch wide strip of his 
body from shoulder to hindquarters. A head shot was out of the 
question, and nothing would be gained by inflicting a flesh 
wound. I had the whole afternoon and evening before me and 
as the tiger would be bound to stand up sooner or later, I 
decided to sit down and wait on events. As I came to this 
decision I caught sight of a movement on my left, and on 
turning my head saw a bear coming stealthily up the valley 
towards the kill, followed by two half-grown cubs. The bear had 
evidently heard the tiger killing the cow and after giving the 



tiger time to settle down— as I have done on many occasions— 
she was now coming to investigate, for unless they have a 
special reason bears do not move about at midday Had I been 
standing on the lip of the valley instead of a few feet from the 
kill, I believe I should have witnessed a very interesting sight, 
for on finding the kill, which with their keen scent they would 
have had no difficulty in doing, the bears would have started to 
uncover it. This would have awakened the tiger and I cannot 
imagine that he would have relinquished his kill without a 
fight, and the fight would have been worth seeing. 

The forest guard, who all this time had been standing quietly 
behind me seeing nothing but the ground at his feet, now 
caught sight of the bears and exclaimed in a loud voice, 'Dekho 
Sahib, bhalu, bhalu' . The tiger was up and away in a flash, but 
he had some twenty yards of open ground to cover, and as I 
aligned my sights on him and pressed the trigger the forest 
guard, under the impression that I was facing in the wrong 
direction, grabbed my arm and gave it a jerk with the result 
that my bullet struck a tree a few yards from where I was 
standing. Losing one's temper anywhere does no good, least of 
all in a jungle. The forest guard, who did not know what the 
piled-up leaves implied and who had not seen the tiger, was 
under the impression that he had saved my life by drawing my 
attention to the dreaded bears, so there was nothing to be said. 
Alarmed by my shot the bears lumbered away while my 
companion urged me with a catch in his 
throat, 'Maro, maroL ('Shoot, shoot!'). 

A very dejected forest guard walked back with me to 
Dabidhura, and to cheer him up I asked him if he knew of any 
place where I could shoot a ghooral, for my men were still 
without meat. Not only did the game little man know of such a 
place but he also volunteered, blisters and all, to take me to it. 
So after a cup of tea we set off accompanied by two of my men 
who, the forest guard said, would be needed to carry back the 
bag. 



From the veranda of the Rest House the hill falls steeply away. 
Down this hill the forest guard led me for a few hundred yards 
until we came to a foot-wide ghooral track running across the 
face of the hill. I now took the lead and had proceeded for 
about half a mile to the right when, on coming to a rocky ridge, 
I looked across a deep ravine and saw a ghooral on the far side 
standing on a projecting rock and looking into space, as all 
goats including thar, ibex, and markor have a habit of doing. It 
was a male ghooral, as I could see from the white disk on its 
throat, and the distance between us was a shade over two 
hundred yards. Here now was an opportunity not only of 
procuring meat for my men but also of testing the accuracy of 
my new rifle. So, lying down, I put up the two hundred-yard 
leaf sight and, taking very careful aim, fired. At my shot 
the ghooral sank down on the rock on which he had been 
standing, which was very fortunate, for below him was a sheer 
drop of many hundred feet. A second ghooral, which I had not 
seen, now ran up the far side of the ravine followed by a small 
kid, and after standing still and looking back at us several 
times, carried on round the shoulder of the hill. 

While the forest guard and I had a smoke, my two men set off 
to retrieve the bag. Deprived of his share of the bear's fat the 
forest guard was made happy by being promised a bit of the 
ghooral and its skin, which he said he would make into a seat 
for his father who, owing to age and rheumatism, spent all his 
days basking in the sun. 

6 

A visit to the valley early next morning confirmed my suspicion 
that the tiger would not return to his kill, and that the bears 
would. Little but the bones were left when the three bears had 
finished with the kill, and that little was being industriously 
sought by a solitary king vulture when I arrived on the scene. 

The morning was still young so, climbing the hill in the 
direction in which the tiger had gone the previous day, I went 
over the ridge and down the far side to the Loharghat road to 


look for tracks of the man-eating leopard. On my return to the 
Rest House at midday I was informed of yet another tiger kill. 
My informant was an intelligent young man who was on his 
way to Almora to attend a court case and, being unable to 
spare the time to show me where he had seen the tiger killing a 
cow, drew a sketch for me on the floor of the veranda with a 
piece of charcoal. After a combined breakfast and lunch I set 
out to try to find the kill which— if the young man's sketch was 
correct— had taken place five miles from where I had fired at 
the tiger the previous day. The tiger, I found, had come on a 
small herd of cattle grazing on the banks of the stream flowing 
down the main valley and, judging from the condition of the 
soft ground, had experienced some difficulty in pulling down 
the victim he had selected. Killing a big and vigorous animal 
weighing six or seven hundred pounds is a strenuous job and a 
tiger after accomplishing this feat usually takes a breather. On 
this occasion, however, the tiger had picked up the cow as soon 
as he had killed it— as the absence of blood indicated— and 
crossing the stream entered the dense jungle at the foot of the 
hill. 

Yesterday the tiger had covered up his kill at the spot where he 
had done his killing, but today it appeared to be his intention to 
remove his kill to as distant a place as possible from the scene 
of killing. For two miles or more I followed the drag up the 
steep face of the densely wooded hill to where the tiger, when 
he had conveyed his heavy burden to within a few hundred 
yards of the crest, had got one of the cow's hind legs fixed 
between two oak saplings. With a mighty jerk uphill, the tiger 
tore the leg off a little below the hock, and leaving that fixed 
between the saplings went on with his kill. The crest of the hill 
at the point where the tiger arrived with his kill was flat and 
overgrown with oak saplings a foot or two feet in girth. Under 
these trees, where there were no bushes or cover of any kind, 
the tiger left his kill without making any attempt to cover it up. 

I had followed the drag slowly, carrying only my rifle and a few 
cartridges; even so, when I arrived at the crest my shirt was 



wet and my throat dry. I could imagine, therefore, the thirst 
that the tiger must have acquired and his desire to quench it. 
Being in need of a drink myself I set out to find the nearest 
water, where there was also a possibility of finding the tiger. 
The ravine in which I had shot the bear was half a mile to the 
right and had water in it, but there was another ravine closer 
to the left and I decided to try that first. 

I had gone down this ravine for the best part of a mile and had 
come to a place where it narrowed with steep shaly banks on 
either side when, on going round a big rock, I saw the tiger 
lying in front of me at a range of twenty yards. There was a 
small pool of water at this spot, and lying on a narrow strip of 
sand between the pool and the right-hand bank was the tiger. 
Here the ravine took a sharp turn to the right, and part of the 
tiger was on my side of the turn and part round the bend. He 
was lying on his left side with his back to the pool and I could 
see his tail and part of his hind legs. Between me and the 
sleeping animal was a great mass of dry branches that had 
been lopped from overhanging trees some time previously to 
feed buffaloes. It was not possible to negotiate this obstacle 
without making a noise, nor was it possible to go along either 
of the steep banks without causing small landslides of shale. So 
the only thing to do was to sit down and wait for the tiger to 
give me a shot. 

After his great exertion and a good drink, the tiger was 
sleeping soundly and for half an hour he made no movement. 
Then he turned on to his right side and a little more of his legs 
came into view. In this position he lay for a few minutes and 
then stood up, and withdrew round the bend. With finger on 
trigger I waited for him to reappear, for his kill was up the hill 
behind me. Minutes passed and then a kakar a hundred yards 
away went dashing down the hill barking hysterically, and a 
little later a sambhar belled. The tiger had gone; why, I did not 
know, for he had already taken as much exercise as any tiger 
needed to take, and it was not a case of his having scented me, 
for tigers have no sense of smell. It did not matter, however, for 



presently he would return to the kill he had been at such pains 
to take to the top of the hill, and I would be there to receive 
him. The water in the pool where the tiger had drunk was ice- 
cold, and having slaked my thirst I was able to enjoy a long- 
deferred smoke. 

The sun was near setting when I made myself comfortable on 
an oak tree ten yards to the east and a little to the right of the 
kill. The tiger would come up the hill from the west and it was 
not advisable to have the kill directly between us, for tigers 
have very good eyesight. From my seat on the tree I had a clear 
view of the valley and of the hills beyond; and when the setting 
sun, showing as a great ball of fire, was resting on the rim of 
the earth bathing the world in red, a sambhar belled in the 
valley below me. The tiger was on the move and there was 
plenty of lime for him to arrive at his kill while there was still 
sufficient daylight for accurate shooting. 

The ball of fire dipped below the horizon; the red glow died of 
the earth; twilight gave place to darkness; and all was silent in 
the jungle. The moon was in its third quarter, but the stars— 
nowhere more brilliant than in the Himalayas— were giving 
enough light for me to see the kill, which was white. The head 
of the kill was towards me and if the tiger came now and 
started to eat at the hindquarters I would not be able to see 
him, but by aligning my sights on the white kill and then 
raising the rifle and pressing the trigger, as the kill 
disappeared from view, there was a fifty-fifty chance of hitting 
the tiger. But here was no man-eater to be fired at under any 
conditions. Here was a 'temple' tiger who had never molested 
human beings and who, though he had killed four head of cattle 
in four consecutive days, had committed no crime against the 
jungle code. To kill him outright would benefit those who were 
suffering from his depredations, but to take an uncertain shot 
at night with the possibility of only wounding him and leaving 
him to suffer for hours, or if unrecovered to become a man- 
eater, was not justifiable in any circumstances. 



Light was coming in the east, for the boles of the trees were 
beginning to cast vague shadows, and then the moon rose, 
flooding the open patches of the jungle with light. It was then 
that the tiger came. I could not see him but I knew he had 
come for I could feel and sense his presence. Was he crouching 
on the far side of the kill with just his eyes and the top of his 
head raised over the brow of the hill watching me? No, that 
was not possible, for from the time I had made myself 
comfortable on my seat I had become part of the tree and 
tigers do not go through a jungle scanning, without a reason, 
every tree they approach. And yet, the tiger was here, and he 
was looking at me. 

There was sufficient light now for me to see clearly, and very 
carefully I scanned the ground in front of me. Then as I turned 
my head to the right, to look behind, I saw the tiger. He was 
sitting on his hunkers in a patch of moonlight, facing the kill, 
with his head turned looking up at me. When he saw me 
looking down on him he flattened his ears, and as I made no 
further movement, his ears regained their upright position. I 
could imagine him saying to himself, 'Well, you have now seen 
me, and what are you going to do about it ? 1 There was little I 
could do about it, for in order to get a shot I would have to turn 
a half-circle and it would not be possible to do this without 
alarming the tiger, who was looking at me from a range of 
fifteen feet. There was, however, just a possibility of my getting 
a shot from my left shoulder, and this I decided to try to do. The 
rifle was resting on my knees with the muzzle pointing to the 
left, and as I lifted it and started turning it to the right the tiger 
lowered his head and again flattened his ears. In this position 
he remained as long as I was motionless, but the moment I 
started to move the rifle again, he was up and away into the 
shadows behind. 

Well, that was that, and the tiger had very definitely won 
another round. As long as I sat on the tree he would not return, 
but if I went away he might come back and remove the kill; and 
as he could not eat a whole cow in a night I would have another 



chance next day. 

The question that now faced me was where to spend the night. 

I had already walked some twenty miles that day and the 
prospect of doing another eight miles to the Rest House- 
through forest all the way— did not appeal to me. In any other 
locality I would have moved away from the kill for two or three 
hundred yards and slept peacefully on the ground, but in this 
locality there was a man-eating leopard, and man-eating 
leopards hunt at night. While sitting on the tree earlier in the 
evening, I had heard the distant pealing of cattle-bells, coming 
either from a village or from a cattle-station. I had pin-pointed 
the sound and I now set out to find where it had come from. 
Cattle-lifting is unknown in the Himalayas, and throughout 
Kumaon there are communal cattle-stations situated in the 
jungles close to the grazing grounds. I traced the bells I had 
heard to one of these stations, in which there were about a 
hundred head of cattle in a large open shed surrounded by a 
strong stockade. The fact that the station was in the depth of 
the jungle, and unguarded, was proof of the honesty of the 
hillfolk, and it was also proof that until my arrival cattle in the 
Dabidhura area had not been molested by tigers. 

At night all animals in the jungle are suspicious, and if I was to 
spend the night under the protection of the inmates of the shed 
I would have to disarm their very natural suspicion. The 
tenants of our village at Kaladhungi keep about nine hundred 
head of cows and buffaloes, and having been associated with 
cattle from my earliest childhood I know the language they 
understand. Moving very slowly and speaking to the cattle I 
approached the shed, and on reaching the stockade sat down 
with my back to it to have a smoke. Several cows were 
standing near the spot where I sat and one of them now 
advanced and, putting its head through the bars of the 
stockade, started to lick the back of my head; a friendly 
gesture, but a wetting one, and here at an altitude of eight 
thousand feet the nights were cold. Having finished my 
cigarette, I unloaded my rifle and, covering it with straw. 



climbed the stockade. 


Care was needed in selecting a place on which to sleep, for if 
there was an alarm during the night and the cattle started 
milling round it would be unsafe to be caught on the ground. 
Near the centre of the shed, and close to one of the roof- 
supports up which I could go if the need arose, there was an 
open space between two sleeping cows. Stepping over 
recumbent animals and moving the heads of standing ones to 
get past them, I lay down between the two that were lying back 
to back. There was no alarm during the night, so the necessity 
for me to shin up the roof-support did not arise, and with the 
warm bodies of the cows to keep off the night chills and with 
the honey-sweet smell of healthy cattle in my nostrils I slept as 
one at peace with all the world, tigers and man-eating leopards 
included. 

The sun was just rising next morning when, on hearing voices, I 
opened my eyes and saw three men, armed with milking pails, 
staring at me through the bars of the stockade. The water I had 
drunk at the tiger's pool was all that had passed my lips since 
breakfast the previous day, and the warm drink of milk the men 
gave me— after they had recovered from their amazement at 
finding me asleep with their cattle— was very welcome. 
Declining the men's invitation to accompany them back to their 
village for a meal, I thanked them for their board and lodging 
and, before returning to the Rest House for a bath and a square 
meal, set off to see where the tiger had taken his kill. To my 
surprise I found the kill lying just as I had left it, and after 
covering it over with branches to protect it from vultures and 
golden-headed eagles I went on to the Rest House. 

In no other part of the world, I imagine, are servants as 
tolerant of the vagaries of their masters as in India. When I 
returned to the Rest House after an absence of twenty-four 
hours, no surprise was expressed, and no questions asked. A 
hot bath was ready, clean clothes laid out, and within a very 
short time I was sitting down to a breakfast of porridge. 



scrambled eggs, hot chapatis and honey— the last a present 
from the old priest— and a dish of tea. Breakfast over, I sat on 
the grass in front of the Rest House admiring the gorgeous 
view and making plans. I had set out from my home in Naini Tal 
with one object, and one object only, to try to shoot the Panar 
man-eating leopard; and from the night it had tried to drag the 
herdsman off the temple platform nothing had been heard of it. 
The priest, the bania, and all the people in near and distant 
villages that I questioned informed me that there were 
occasions when for long periods the man-eater seemed to 
disappear off the face of the earth and they were of the opinion 
that one of these periods had now started, but no one could say 
how long it would last. The area over which the man-eater was 
operating was vast, and in it there were possibly ten to twenty 
leopards. To find and shoot in that area one particular leopard 
— that had stopped killing human beings— without knowing 
where to look for it, was a hopeless job. 

My mission as far as the man-eater was concerned had failed, 
and no useful purpose would be served by my prolonging my 
stay at Dabidhura. The question of the temple tiger remained. I 
did not feel that the killing of this tiger was any responsibility 
of mine; but I did feel, and felt very strongly, that my pursuit of 
him was inducing him to kill more cattle than he would 
otherwise have done. Why a male tiger started killing cattle on 
the day of my arrival at Dabidhura it was not possible to say, 
and whether he would stop when I went away remained to be 
seen. Anyway, I had tried my best to shoot him; had paid 
compensation for the damage he had done to the full extent of 
my purse; and he had provided me with one of the most 
interesting jungle experiences I had ever had. So I harboured 
no resentment against him for having beaten me at every point 
in the exciting game we had played during the past four days. 
These four days had been very strenuous for me, so I would 
rest today and make an early start next morning on the first 
stage of my journey back to Naini Tal. I had just come to this 
decision when a voice from behind me said, 'Salaam, Sahib. I 



have come to tell you that the tiger has killed one of my cows.' 
One more chance of shooting the tiger, and whether I 
succeeded or not I would stick to my plan of leaving next 
morning. 

7 

Annoyed at the interference of human beings and bears, the 
tiger had shifted his ground, and this last kill had taken place 
on the eastern face of the Dabidhura mountain several miles 
from where I had sat up for him the previous evening. The 
ground here was undulating, with patches of scrub and a few 
odd trees dotted here and there; ideal ground for chukor (hill 
partridge), but the last place in which I would have expected to 
find a tiger. Running diagonally across the face of the mountain 
was a shallow depression. In this depression were patches of 
dense scrub, interspersed with open glades of short grass. At 
the edge of one of these glades the cow had been killed, 
dragged a few yards towards some bushes, and left in the open. 
On the opposite or downhill side of the glade to the kill, there 
was a big oak tree. On this tree, the only one for hundreds of 
yards around, I decided to sit. 

While my men warmed a kettle of water for tea I scouted round 
to see if I could get a shot at the tiger on foot. The tiger I felt 
sure was lying up somewhere in the depression, but though I 
searched every foot of it for an hour I saw no sign of him. 

The tree that was to provide me with a seat was leaning out 
towards the glade. Excessive lopping had induced a crop of 
small branches all along the trunk, which made the tree easy to 
climb but obscured a view of the trunk from above. Twenty feet 
up, a single big branch jutted out over the glade, offering the 
only seat on the tree but not a comfortable one or one easy to 
reach. At 4 p.m. I sent my men away, instructing them to go to 
a village farther up the hill and wait for me, for I had no 
intention of sitting up after sun-down. 

The kill, as I have said, was lying in the open, ten yards from 
me and with its hindquarters a yard or so from a dense clump 


of bushes. I had been in position for an hour and was watching 
a number of red-whiskered bulbuls feeding on a raspberry bush 
to my right front, when on turning my eyes to look at the kill I 
saw the tiger's head projecting beyond the clump of bushes. He 
was evidently lying down, for his head was close to the ground, 
and his eyes were fixed on me. Presently a paw was advanced, 
then another, and then very slowly and with belly to ground the 
tiger drew himself up to his kill. Here he lay for several 
minutes without movement. Then, feeling with his mouth, and 
with his eyes still fixed on me, he bit off the cow's tail, laid it on 
one side and started to eat. Having eaten nothing since his 
fight with the bear three days before, he was hungry, and he 
ate just as a man would eat an apple, ignoring the skin and 
taking great bites of flesh from the hindquarters. 

The rifle was across my knees pointing in the direction of the 
tiger, and all I had to do was to raise it to my shoulder. I would 
get an opportunity of doing this when he turned his eyes away 
from me for a brief moment. But the tiger appeared to know his 
danger, for without taking his eyes off me he ate on steadily 
and unhurriedly. When he had consumed about fifteen or 
twenty pounds of flesh, and when the bulbuls had left the 
raspberry bush and, joined by two black-throated jays, were 
making a great chattering on the bushes behind him, I thought 
it was time for me to act. If I raised the rifle very slowly he 
would probably not notice the movement so, when the birds 
were chattering their loudest, I started to do this. I had raised 
the muzzle possibly six inches, when the tiger slid backwards 
as if drawn back by a powerful spring. With rifle to shoulder 
and elbows on knees I now waited for the tiger to project his 
head a second time, and this I felt sure he would presently do. 
Minutes passed, and then I heard the tiger. He had skirted 
round the bushes and, approaching from behind, started to 
claw my tree where the thick growth of small branches on the 
trunk made it impossible for me to see him. Purring with 
pleasure the tiger once and again clawed the tree with vigour, 
while I sat on my branch and rocked with silent laughter. 



I know that crows and monkeys have a sense of humour, but 
until that day I did not know that tigers also possessed this 
sense. Nor did I know that an animal could have the luck, and 
the impudence, that particular tiger had. In five days he had 
killed five cows, four of them in broad daylight. In those five 
days I had seen him eight times and on four occasions I had 
pressed a trigger on him. And now, after staring at me for half 
an hour and eating while doing so, he was clawing the tree on 
which I was sitting and purring to show his contempt of me. 

When telling me of the tiger the old priest said, 'I have no 
objection. Sahib, to your trying to shoot this tiger but neither 
you nor anyone else will ever succeed in killing it.' The tiger 
was now, in his own way, confirming what the priest had said. 
Well, the tiger had made the last move in the exciting game we 
had played without injury to either of us, but I was not going to 
give him the satisfaction of having the last laugh. Laying down 
the rifle and cupping my hands I waited until he stopped 
clawing, and then sent a full-throated shout echoing over the 
hills which sent him careening down the hill at full speed and 
brought my men down from the village at a run. 'We saw the 
tiger running away with his tail in the air,' the men said when 
they arrived, 'and just see what he has done to the tree.' 

Next morning I bade farewell to all my friends at Dabidhura, 
and assured them I would return when the man-eater got 
active again. 

I visited Dabidhura several times in subsequent years while 
hunting man-eaters, and I never heard of anyone having killed 
the temple tiger. So I hope that in the fullness of time this old 
warrior, like an old soldier, just faded away. 



The Muktesar Man-Eater 

EIGHTEEN MILES TO THE NORTH— north-east of Naini Tal is 
a hill eight thousand feet high and twelve to fifteen miles long, 
running east and west. The western end of the hill rises steeply 
and near this end is the Muktesar Veterinary Research 
Institute, where lymph and vaccines are produced to fight 
India's cattle diseases. The laboratory and staff quarters are 
situated on the northern face of the hill and command one of 
the best views to be had anywhere of the Himalayan snowy 
range. This range, and all the hills that lie between it and the 
plains of India, run east and west, and from a commanding 
point on any of the hills an uninterrupted view can be obtained 
not only of the snows to the north but also of the hills and 
valleys to the east and to the west as far as the eye can see. 
People who have lived at Muktesar claim that it is the most 
beautiful spot in Kumaon, and that its climate has no equal. 

A tiger that thought as highly of the amenities of Muktesar as 
human beings did, took up her residence in the extensive 
forests adjoining the small settlement. Here she lived very 
happily on sambhar, kakar, and wild pig, until she had the 
misfortune to have an encounter with a porcupine. In this 
encounter she lost an eye and got some fifty quills, varying in 
length from one to nine inches, embedded in the arm and 
under the pad of her right foreleg. Several of these quills after 
striking a bone had doubled back in the form of a U, the point 
and the broken-off end being close together. Suppurating sores 
formed where she endeavoured to extract the quills with her 
teeth, and while she was lying up in a thick patch of grass, 
starving and licking her wounds, a woman selected this 
particular patch of grass to cut as fodder for her cattle. At first 
the tigress took no notice, but when the woman had cut the 
grass right up to where she was lying, the tigress struck once, 
the blow crushing the woman's skull. Death was instantaneous, 
for, when found the following day, she was grasping her sickle 
with one hand and holding a tuft of grass, which she was about 
to cut when struck, with the other. Leaving the woman lying 



where she had fallen, the tigress limped off for a distance of 
over a mile and took refuge in a little hollow under a fallen 
tree. Two days later a man came to chip firewood off this fallen 
tree, and the tigress who was lying on the far side killed him 
also. The man fell across the tree, and as he had removed his 
coat and shirt and the tigress had clawed his back while killing 
him, it is possible that the sight of blood trickling down his 
body as he hung across the bole of the tree first gave her the 
idea that he was something that she could satisfy her hunger 
with. However that may be, before leaving him she ate a small 
portion from his back. A day later she killed her third victim 
deliberately, and without having received any provocation. 
Thereafter she became an established man-eater. 

I heard of the tigress shortly after she started killing human 
beings, and as there were a number of sportsmen at Muktesar, 
all of whom in were keen on bagging the tigress— who was 
operating right on their doorsteps— I did not consider it would 
be sporting of an outsider to meddle in the matter. When the 
toll of human beings killed by the tigress had risen to twenty- 
four, however, and the lives of all the people living in the 
settlement and neighbouring villages were endangered and 
work at the Institute slowed down, the veterinary officer in 
charge of the Institute requested the Government to solicit my 
help. 

My task, as I saw it, was not going to be an easy one, for, apart 
from the fact that my experience of man-eaters was very 
limited, the extensive ground over which the tigress was 
operating was not known to me and I therefore had no idea 
where to look for her. 

Accompanied by a servant and two men carrying a roll of 
bedding and a suitcase, I left Naini Tal at midday and walked 
ten miles to the Ramgarh Dak Bungalow, where I spent the 
night. The Dak Bungalow khansama(cook, bottle-washer, and 
general factotum) was a friend of mine, and when he learnt 
that I was on my way to Muktesar to try to shoot the man-eater. 



he warned me to be very careful while negotiating the last two 
miles into Muktesar for, he said, several people had recently 
been killed on that stretch of road. 

Leaving my men to pack up and follow me I armed myself with 
a double-barrelled .500 express rifle using modified cordite, 
and making a very early start next morning arrived at the 
junction of the Naini Tal / Almora road with the Muktesar road 
just as it was getting light. From this point it was necessary to 
walk warily for I was now in the man-eater's country. Before 
zigzagging up the face of a very steep hill the road runs for 
some distance over flat ground on which grows the orange- 
coloured lily, the round hard seeds of which can be used as shot 
in a muzzle-loading gun. This was the first time I had ever 
climbed that hill and I was very interested to see the caves, 
hollowed out by wind, in the sandstone cliffs overhanging the 
road. In a gale I imagine these caves must produce some very 
weird sounds, for they are of different sizes and, while some 
are shallow, others appear to penetrate deep into the 
sandstone. 

Where the road comes out on a saddle of the hill there is a 
small area of flat ground flanked on the far side by the 
Muktesar Post Office, and a small bazaar. The post office was 
not open at that early hour, but one of the shops was and the 
shopkeeper very kindly gave me directions to the Dak 
Bungalow which, he said, was half a mile away on the northern 
face of the hill. There are two Dak Bungalows at Muktesar, one 
reserved for government officials and the other for the general 
public. I did not know this and my shopkeeper friend, mistaking 
me for a government official, possibly because of the size of my 
hat, directed me to the wrong one and the khansama in charge 
of the bungalow, and I, incurred the displeasure of the red tape 
brigade, the khansama by providing me with breakfast, and I 
by partaking of it. However, of this I was at the time happily 
ignorant, and later I made it my business to see that 
the khansama did not not suffer in any way for my mistake. 



While I was admiring the superb view of the snowy range, and 
waiting for breakfast, a party of twelve Europeans passed me 
carrying service rifles, followed a few minutes later by a 
sergeant and two men carrying targets and flags. The sergeant, 
a friendly soul, informed me that the party that had just passed 
was on its way to the rifle range, and that it was keeping 
together because of the man-eater. I learnt from the sergeant 
that the officer in charge of the Institute had received a 
telegram from the Government the previous day informing him 
that I was on my way to Muktesar. 

The sergeant expressed the hope that I would succeed in 
shooting the man-eater for, he said, conditions in the 
settlement had become very difficult. No one even in daylight, 
dared to move about alone, and after dusk everyone had to 
remain behind locked doors. Many attempts had been made to 
shoot the man-eater but it had never returned to any of the kills 
that had been sat over. 

After a very good breakfast I instructed the khansama to tell 
my men when they arrived that I had gone out to try get news 
of the man-eater, and that I did not know when I would return. 
Then, picking up my rifle, I went up to the post office to send a 
telegram to my mother to let her know I had arrived safely. 

From the flat ground in front of the post office and the bazaar 
the southern face of the Muktesar hill falls steeply away, and is 
cut up by ridges and ravines overgrown with dense brushwood, 
with a few trees scattered here and there. I was standing on 
the edge of the hill, looking down into the valley and the well- 
wooded Ramgarh hills beyond, when I was joined by the 
Postmaster and several shopkeepers. The Postmaster had dealt 
with the Government telegram of the previous day, and on 
seeing my signature on the form I had just handed in, he 
concluded I was the person referred to in the telegram and his 
friends and he had now come to offer me their help. I was very 
glad of the offer for they were in the best position to see and 
converse with everyone coming to Muktesar, and as the man- 



eater was sure to be the main topic of conversation where two 
or more were gathered together, they would be able to collect 
information that would be of great value to me. In rural India, 
the post office and the bania's shop are to village folk what 
taverns and clubs are to people of other lands, and if 
information on any particular subject is sought, the post office 
and the bania's shop are the best places to seek it. 

In a fold of the hill to our left front, and about two miles away 
and a thousand feet below us, was a patch of cultivation. This I 
was informed was Badri Sah's apple orchard. Badri, son of an 
old friend of mine, had visited me in Naini Tal some months 
previously and had offered to put me up in his guest house and 
to assist me in every way he could to shoot the man-eater. This 
offer, for the reason already given, I had not accepted. Now, 
however, as I had come to Muktesar at the request of the 
Government I decided I would call on Badri and accept his 
offer to help me, especially as I had just been informed by my 
companions that the last human kill had taken place in the 
valley below his orchard. 

Thanking all the men who were standing round me, and telling 
them I would rely on them for further information, I set off 
down the Dhari road. The day was still young and before 
calling on Badri there was time to visit some of the villages 
farther along the hill to the east. There were no milestones 
along the road, and after I had covered what I considered was 
about six miles and visited two villages, I turned back. I had 
retraced my steps for about three miles when I overtook a 
small girl having difficulties with a bullock. The girl, who was 
about eight years old, wanted the bullock to go in the direction 
of Muktesar, while the bullock wanted to go in the opposite 
direction, and when I arrived on the scene the stage had been 
reached when neither would do what the other wanted. The 
bullock was a quiet old beast, and with the girl walking in front 
holding the rope that was tied round his neck and I walking 
behind to keep him on the move he gave no further trouble. 
After we had proceeded a short distance I said: 



'We are not stealing Kalwa, are we? 1 I heard her addressing the 
black bullock by that name. 

'N-o,' she answered indignantly turning her big brown 

eyes full on me. 

'To whom does he belong? 1 I next asked. 

'To my father/ she said. 

'And where are we taking him? 1 
'To my uncle. 1 

'And why does uncle want Kalwa? 1 
'To plough his field.' 

'But Kalwa can't plough uncle's field by himself.' 

'Of course not/ she said. I was being stupid, but then you could 
not expect a sahib to know anything about bullocks and 
ploughing. 

'Has uncle only got one bullock?' I next asked. 

'Yes/ she said; 'he has only got one bullock now, but he did 
have two.' 

'Where is the other one?' I asked, thinking that it had probably 
been sold to satisfy a debt. 

'The tiger killed it yesterday,' I was told. Here was news indeed, 
and while I was digesting it we walked on in silence, the girl 
every now and then looking back at me until she plucked up 
courage to ask: 

'Have you come to shoot the tiger?' 

'Yes,' I said, 'I have come to try to shoot the tiger.' 

'Then why are you going away from the kill?' 

'Because we are taking Kalwa to uncle.' My answer appeared to 
satisfy the girl, and we plodded on. I had got some very useful 



information, but I wanted more and presently I said: 

'Don't you know that the tiger is a man-eater? 1 

'Oh, yes,' she said, 'it ate Kunthi's father and Bonshi Singh's 
mother, and lots of other people.' 

'Then why did your father send you with Kalwa? Why did he not 
come himself? 1 

'Because he has bhabari bokhar (malaria). 1 
'Have you no brothers?' 

'No. I had a brother but he died long ago.' 

'A mother?' 

'Yes, I have a mother; she is cooking the food. 1 
'A sister?' 

'No, I have no sister. 1 So on this small girl had devolved the 
dangerous task of taking her father's bullock to her uncle, 
along a road on which men were afraid to walk except when in 
large parties, and on which in four hours I had not seen 
another human being. 

We had now come to a path up which the girl went, the bullock 
following, and I bringing up the rear. Presently we came to a 
field on the far side of which was a small house. As we 
approached the house the girl called out and told her uncle 
that she had brought Kalwa. 

'All right,' a man's voice answered from the house, 'tie him to 
the post, Putli, and go home. I am having my food. 1 So we tied 
Kalwa to the post and went back to the road. Without the 
connecting link of Kalwa between us, Putli (dolly) was now shy, 
and as she would not walk by my side I walked ahead, suiting 
my pace to hers. We walked in silence for some time and then I 
said: 


'I want to shoot the tiger that killed uncle's bullock but I don't 



know where the kill is. Will you show me? 1 
'Oh, yes/ she said eagerly 'I will show you. 1 
'Have you seen the kill? 1 I asked. 

'No/ she said, 'I have not seen it, but I heard uncle telling my 
father where it was.' 

'Is it close to the road? 1 

'I don't know.' 

'Was the bullock alone when it was killed?' 

'No, it was with the village cattle.' 

'Was it killed in the morning or the evening?' 

'It was killed in the morning when it was going out to graze 
with the cows.' 

While talking to the girl I was keeping a sharp look-out all 
round, for the road was bordered on the left by heavy tree 
jungle, and on the right by dense scrub. We had proceeded for 
about a mile when we came to a well-used cattle track leading 
off into the jungle on the left. Here the girl stopped and said it 
was on this track that her uncle had told her father the bullock 
had been killed. I had now got all the particulars I needed to 
enable me to find the kill, and after seeing the girl safely to her 
home I returned to the cattle track. This track ran across a 
valley and I had gone along it for about a quarter of a mile 
when I came upon a spot where cattle had stampeded. Leaving 
the track, I now went through the jungle, parallel to and about 
fifty yards below the track. I had only gone a short distance 
when I came on a drag-mark. This drag-mark went straight 
down into the valley, and after I had followed it for a few 
hundred yards I found the bullock, from which only a small 
portion of the hindquarters had been eaten. It was lying at the 
foot of a bank about twenty feet high, and some forty feet from 
the head of a deep ravine. Between the ravine and the kill was 



a stunted tree, smothered over by a wild rose. This was the 
only tree within a reasonable distance of the kill on which I 
could sit with any hope of bagging the tiger, for there was no 
moon, and if the tiger came after dark— as I felt sure it would 
— the nearer I was to the kill the better would be my chance of 
killing the tiger. 

It was now 2 p.m. and there was just time for me to call on 
Badri and ask him for a cup of tea, of which I was in need for I 
had done a lot of walking since leaving Ramgarh at four o'clock 
that morning. The road to Badri's orchard takes off close to 
where the cattle track joins the road, and runs down a steep 
hill for a mile through dense brushwood. Badri was near his 
guest house, attending to a damaged apple tree when I arrived, 
and on hearing the reason for my visit he took me up the guest 
house which was on a little knoll overlooking the orchard. 

While we sat on the veranda waiting for the tea and something 
to eat that Badri had ordered his servant to prepare for me, I 
told him why I had come to Muktesar, and about the kill the 
young girl had enabled me to find. When I asked Badri why this 
kill had not been reported to the sportsmen at Muktesar, he 
said that owing to the repeated failures of the sportsmen to bag 
the tiger the village folk had lost confidence in them, and for 
this reason kills were no longer being reported to them. Badri 
attributed the failures to the elaborate preparations that had 
been made to sit over kills. These preparations consisted of 
clearing the ground near the kills of all abstractions in the way 
of bushes and small trees, the building of big machans, and the 
occupation of the machans by several men. Reasons enough for 
the reputation the tiger had earned of never returning to a kill. 
Badri was convinced that there was only one tiger in Muktesar 
district and that it was slightly lame in its right foreleg, but he 
did not know what had caused the lameness, nor did he know 
whether the animal was male or female. 

Sitting on the veranda with us was a big Airedale terrier. 
Presently the dog started growling, and looking in the direction 
in which the dog was facing, we saw a big langur sitting on the 



ground and holding down the branch of an apple tree, and 
eating the unripe fruit. Picking up a shotgun that was leaning 
against the railing of the veranda, Badri loaded it with No. 4 
shot and fired. The range was too great for the pellets, 
assuming any hit it, to do the langur any harm, but the shot had 
the effect of making it canter up the hill with the dog in hot 
pursuit. Frightened that the dog might come to grief, I asked 
Badri to call it back, but he said it would be all right for the dog 
was always chasing this particular animal, which he said had 
done a lot of damage to his young trees. The dog was now 
gaining on the langur, and when it got to within a few yards 
the langurwhipped round, got the dog by the ears, and bit a 
lump off the side of its head. The wound was a very severe one, 
and by the time we had finished attending to it my tea and a 
plate of hot puris (unleavened bread fried in butter) was ready 
for me. 

I had told Badri about the tree I intended sitting on, and when I 
returned to the kill he insisted on going with me accompanied 
by two men carrying materials for making a 
small machan. Badri and the two men had lived under the 
shadow of the man-eater for over a year and had no illusions 
about it, and when they saw that there were no trees near the 
kill— with the exception of the one I had selected— in which 
a machan could be built, they urged me not to sit up that night, 
on the assumption that the tiger would remove the kill and 
provide me with a more suitable place to sit up the following 
night. This was what I myself would have done if the tiger had 
not been a man-eater, but as it was I was disinclined to miss a 
chance which might not recur on the morrow, even if it entailed 
a little risk. There were bears in this forest and if one of them 
smelt the kill, any hope I had of getting a shot at the tiger 
would vanish, for Himalayan bears are no respecters of tigers 
and do not hesitate to appropriate their kills. Climbing into the 
tree, smothered as it was by the rose bush, was a difficult feat, 
and after I had made myself as comfortable as the thorn 
permitted and my rifle had been handed up to me Badri and his 



men left, promising to return early next morning. 

I was facing the hill, with the ravine behind me. I was in clear 
view of any animal coming down from above, but if the tiger 
came from below, as I expected, it would not see me until it got 
to the kill. The bullock, which was white, was lying on its right 
side with its legs towards me, and at a distance of about fifteen 
feet. I had taken my seat at 4 p.m. and an hour later 
a kakar started barking on the side of the ravine two hundred 
yards below me. The tiger was on the move, and having seen it 
the kakar was standing still and barking. For a long time it 
barked and then it started to move away, the bark growing 
fainter and fainter until the sound died away round the 
shoulder of the hill. This indicated that after coming within 
sight of the kill, the tiger had lain down. I had expected this to 
happen after having been told by Badri the reasons for the 
failures to shoot the tiger over a kill. I knew the tiger would 
now be lying somewhere nearby with his eyes and ears open, to 
make quite sure there were no human beings near the kill, 
before he approached it. Minute succeeded long minute; dusk 
came; objects on the hill in front of me became indistinct and 
then faded out. I could still see the kill as a white blur when a 
stick snapped at the head of the ravine and stealthy steps came 
towards me, and then stopped immediately below. For a minute 
or two there was dead silence, and then the tiger lay down on 
the dry leaves at the foot of the tree. 

Heavy clouds had rolled up near sunset and there was now a 
black canopy overhead blotting out the stars. When the tiger 
eventually got up and went to the kill, the night could best be 
described as pitch black. Strain my eyes as I would, I could see 
nothing of the white bullock, and still less of the tiger. On 
reaching the kill the tiger started blowing on it. In the 
Himalayas, and especially in the summer, kills attract hornets, 
most of which leave as the light fades but those that are too 
torpid to fly remain, and a tiger— possibly after bitter 
experience— blows off the hornets adhering to the exposed 
portion of the flesh before starting to feed. There was no need 



for me to hurry over my shot for, close though it was, the tiger 
would not see me, unless I attracted its attention by some 
movement or sound. I can see reasonably well on a dark night 
by the light of the stars, but there were no stars visible that 
night nor was there a flicker of lightning in the heavy clouds. 
The tiger had not moved the kill before starting to eat, so I 
knew he was lying broadside on to me, on the right-hand side 
of the kill. 

Owing to the attempts that had been made to shoot the tiger I 
had suspicion that it would not come before dark, and it had 
been my intention to take what aim I could— by the light of the 
stars— and then move the muzzle of my rifle sufficiently for my 
bullet to go a foot or two to the right of the kill. But now that 
the clouds had rendered my eyes useless, I would have to 
depend on my ears (my hearing at that time was perfect). 
Raising the rifle and resting my elbows on my knees, I took 
careful aim at the sound the tiger was making, and while 
holding the rifle steady, turned my right ear to the sound, and 
then back again. My aim was a little too high, so, lowering the 
muzzle a fraction of an inch, I again turned my head and 
listened. After I had done this a few times and satisfied myself 
that I was pointing at the sound, I moved the muzzle a little to 
the right and pressed the trigger. In two bounds the tiger was 
up the twenty-foot bank. At the top there was a small bit of flat 
ground, beyond which the hill went up steeply. I heard the tiger 
on the dry leaves as far as the flat ground, and then there was 
silence. This silence could be interpreted to mean either that 
the tiger had died on reaching the flat ground or that it was 
unwounded. Keeping the rifle to my shoulder I listened intently 
for three or four minutes, and as there was no further sound I 
lowered the rifle. This movement was greeted by a deep growl 
from the top of the bank. So the tiger was unwounded, and had 
seen me. My seat on the tree had originally been about ten feet 
up but, as I had nothing solid to sit on, the rose bush had 
sagged under my weight and I was now possibly no more than 
eight feet above ground, with my dangling feet considerably 



lower. And a little above and some twenty feet from me a tiger 
that I had every reason to believe was a man-eater was 
growling deep down in his throat. 

The near proximity of a tiger in daylight, even when it has not 
seen you, causes a disturbance in the blood stream. When the 
tiger is not an ordinary one, however, but a man-eater and the 
time is ten o'clock on a dark night, and you know the man-eater 
is watching you, the disturbance in the blood stream becomes a 
storm. I maintain that a tiger does not kill beyond its 
requirements, except under provocation. The tiger that was 
growling at me already, had a kill that would last it for two or 
three days, and there was no necessity for it to kill me. Even 
so, I had an uneasy feeling that on this occasion this particular 
tiger might prove an exception to the rule. Tigers will at times 
return to a kill after being fired at, but I knew this one would 
not do so. I also knew that in spite of my uneasy feeling I was 
perfectly safe so long as I did not lose my balance— I had 
nothing to hold on to— or go to sleep and fall off the tree. 

There was no longer any reason for me to deny myself a smoke, 
so I took out my cigarette case and as I lit a match I heard the 
tiger move away from the edge of the bank. Presently it came 
back and again growled. I had smoked three cigarettes, and the 
tiger was still with me, when it came on to rain. A few big 
drops at first and then a heavy downpour. I had put on light 
clothes when I started from Ramgarh that morning and in a 
few minutes I was wet to the skin, for there was not a leaf 
above me to diffuse the raindrops. The tiger, I knew, would 
have hurried off to shelter under a tree or on the lee of a rock 
the moment the rain started. The rain came on at 11 p.m.; at 4 
a.m. it stopped and the sky cleared. A wind now started to 
blow, to add in my discomfort, and where I had been cold 
before I was now frozen. When I get a twinge of rheumatism I 
remember that night and others like it, and am thankful that it 
is no more than a twinge. 

Badri, good friend that he was, arrived with a man carrying a 
kettle of hot tea just as the sun was rising. Relieving me of my 



rifle the two men caught me as I slid off the tree, for my legs 
were too cramped to function. Then as I lay on the ground and 
drank the tea they massaged my legs and restored circulation. 
When I was able to stand, Badri sent his man off to light a fire 
in the guest house. I had never previously used my ears to 
direct a bullet and was interested to find that I had missed the 
tiger's head by only a few inches. The elevation had been all 
right but I had not moved the muzzle of the rifle far enough to 
the right, with the result that my bullet had struck the bullock 
six inches from where the tiger was eating. 

The tea and the half-mile walk up to the road took all the 
creases out of me, and when we started down the mile-long 
track to Badri's orchard, wet clothes and an empty stomach 
were my only discomfort. The track ran over red clay which the 
rain had made very slippery. In this clay were three tracks: 
Badri's and his man's tracks going up, and the man's tracks 
going down. For fifty yards there were only these three tracks 
in the wet clay, and then, where there was a bend in the track, 
a tigress had jumped down from the bank on the right and gone 
down the track on the heels of Badri's man. The footprints of 
the man and the pug-marks of the tigress showed that both had 
been travelling at a fast pace. There was nothing that Badri 
and I could do, for the man had a twenty-minute start from us, 
and if he had not reached the safety of the orchard he would 
long have been beyond any help we could give him. With 
uneasy thoughts assailing us, we made what speed we could on 
the slippery ground and were very relieved to find, on coming 
to a footpath from where the orchard and a number of men 
working in it were visible, that the tigress had gone down the 
path while the man had carried on to the orchard. Questioned 
later, the man said he did not know that he had been followed 
by the tigress. 

While drying my clothes in front of a roaring wood-fire in the 
guest house, I questioned Badri about the jungle into which the 
tigress had gone. The path which the tigress had taken, Badri 
told me, ran down into a deep and densely wooded ravine 



which extended down the face of a very steep hill, for a mile or 
more, to where it was met by another ravine coming down from 
the right. At the junction of the two ravines there was a stream 
and here there was an open patch of ground which, Badri said, 
commanded the exit of both ravines. Badri was of the opinion 
that the tigress would lie up for the day in the ravine into which 
we had every reason to believe she had gone, and as this 
appeared to be an ideal place for a beat, we decided to try this 
method of getting a shot at the tigress, provided we could 
muster sufficient men to carry out the beat. Govind Singh, 
Badri's head gardener, was summoned and our plan explained 
to him. Given until midday, Govind Singh said he could muster 
a gang of thirty men to do the beat, and in addition carry out 
his master's orders to gather five maunds (four hundred and 
ten pounds) of peas. Badri had an extensive vegetable garden 
in addition to his apple orchard and the previous evening he 
had received a telegram informing him that the price of 
marrowfat peas on the Naini Tal market had jumped to four 
annas (four pence) a pound. Badri was anxious to take 
advantage of this good price and his men were gathering the 
peas to be dispatched by pack pony that night, to arrive in 
Naini Tal for the early morning market. 

After cleaning my rifle and walking round the orchard, I joined 
Badri at his morning meal— which had been put forward an 
hour to suit me— and at midday Govind produced his gang of 
thirty men. It was essential for someone to supervise the pea- 
pickers, so Badri decided to remain and send Govind to carry 
out the beat. Govind and the thirty men were local residents 
and knew the danger to be apprehended from the man-eater. 
However, after I had told them what I wanted them to do, they 
expressed their willingness to carry out my instructions. Badri 
was to give me an hour's start to enable me to search the 
ravine for the tigress and, if I failed to get a shot, to take up my 
position on the open ground near the stream. Govind was to 
divide his men into two parties, take charge of one party 
himself, and put a reliable man in charge of the other. At the 



end of the hour Badri was to fire a shot and the two parties 
were to set off, one on either side of the ravine, rolling rocks 
down, and shouting and clapping their hands. It all sounded as 
simple as that, but I had my doubts, for I have seen many beats 
go wrong. 

Going up the track down which I had come that morning, I 
followed the path that the tigress had taken, only to find after I 
had gone a short distance that it petered out in a vast expanse 
of dense brushwood. Forcing my way through for several 
hundred yards I found that the hillside was cut up by a series of 
deep ravines and ridges. Going down a ridge which I thought 
was the right-hand boundary of the ravine to be beaten, I came 
to a big drop at the bottom of which the ravine on my left met a 
ravine coming down from the right, and at the junction of the 
two ravines there was a stream. While I was looking down and 
wondering where the open ground was on which I was to take 
my stand, I heard flies buzzing near me and on following the 
sound found the remains of a cow that had been killed about a 
week before. The marks on the animal's throat showed that it 
had been killed by a tiger. The tiger had eaten all of the cow, 
except a portion of the shoulders, and the neck and head. 
Without having any particular reason for doing so, I dragged 
the carcass to the edge and sent it crashing down the steep 
hill. After rolling for about a hundred yards the carcass fetched 
up in a little hollow a short distance from the stream. Working 
round to the left I found an open patch of ground on a ridge 
about three hundred yards from the hollow into which I had 
rolled the remains of the cow. The ground down here was very 
different from what I had pictured it to be. There was no place 
where I could stand to overlook the hillside that was to be 
beaten, and the tigress might break out anywhere without my 
seeing her. However, it was then too late to do anything, for 
Badri had fired the shot that was to let me know the beat had 
started. Presently, away in the distance, I heard men shouting. 
For a time I thought the beat was coming my way and then the 
sounds grew fainter and fainter until they eventually died away. 



An hour later I again heard the beaters. They were coming 
down the hill to my right, and when they were on a level with 
me I shouted to them to stop the beat and join me on the ridge. 
It was no one's fault that the beat had miscarried, for without 
knowing the ground and without previous preparation we had 
tried to beat with a handful of untrained men a vast area of 
dense brushwood that hundreds of trained men would have 
found difficult to cope with. 

The beaters had had a very strenuous time forcing their way 
through the brushwood, and while they sat in a bunch 
removing thorns from their hands and feet and smoking my 
cigarettes, Govind and I stood facing each other, discussing his 
suggestion of carrying out a beat on the morrow in which every 
available man in Muktesar and the surrounding villages would 
take part. Suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, Govind 
stopped talking. I could see that something unusual had 
attracted his attention behind me, for his eyes narrowed and a 
look of incredulity came over his face. Swinging round I looked 
in the direction in which he was facing, and there, quietly 
walking along a field that had gone out of cultivation, was the 
tigress. She was about four hundred yards away on the hill on 
the far side of the stream, and was coming towards us. 

When a tiger is approaching you in the forest— even when you 
are far from human habitations— thoughts course through your 
mind of the many things that can go wrong to spoil your chance 
of getting the shot, or the photograph, you are hoping for. On 
one occasion I was sitting on a hillside overlooking a game 
track, waiting for a tiger. The track led to a very sacred jungle 
shrine known as Baram ka Than. Baram is a jungle God who 
protects human beings and does not permit the shooting of 
animals in the area he watches over. The forest in the heart of 
which this shrine is situated is well stocked with game and is a 
favourite hunting ground of poachers for miles around, and of 
sportsmen from all parts of India. Yet, in a lifetime's 
acquaintance with that forest, I do not know of a single 
instance of an animal having been shot in the vicinity of the 



shrine. When therefore I set out that day to shoot a tiger that 
had been taking toll of our village buffaloes, I selected a spot a 
mile from Baram's shrine. I was in position, behind a bush, at 4 
p.m. and an hour later a sambhar belled in the direction from 
which I was expecting the tiger. A little later and a little nearer 
to me a kakar started barking; the tiger was coming along the 
track near which I was sitting. The jungle was fairly open and 
consisted mostly of young jamun trees, two to three feet in 
girth. I caught sight of the tiger— a big male— when he was 
two hundred yards away. He was coming slowly and had 
reduced the distance between us to a hundred yards when I 
heard the swish of leaves, and on looking up saw that one of 
the jamun trees whose branches were interlaced with another 
was beginning to lean over. Very slowly the tree heeled over 
until it came in contact with another tree of the same species 
and of about the same size. For a few moments the second tree 
supported the weight of the first and then it, too, started to 
keel over. When the two trees were at an angle of about thirty 
degrees from the perpendicular, they fetched up against a third 
and smaller tree. For a moment or two there was a pause, and 
then all three trees crashed to the ground. While watching the 
trees, which were only a few yards from me, I had kept an eye 
on the tiger. At the first sound of the leaves he had come to a 
halt and when the trees crashed to the ground he turned and, 
without showing any sign of alarm, went back in the direction 
from which he had come. What made the occurrence I had 
witnessed so unusual was that the trees were young and 
vigorous; that no rain had fallen recently to loosen their roots; 
that not a breath of air was stirring in the forest; and, finally, 
that the trees had fallen across the track leading to the shrine 
when the tiger had only another seventy yards to cover to give 
me the shot I was waiting for. 

The chances of a shot being spoilt are greatly increased when 
the quarry is in an inhabited area in which parties of men may 
be travelling from one village to another or going to or from 
markets, or where shots may be fired to scare 



away langurs from apple orchards. The tigress still had three 
hundred yards to go to reach the stream, and two hundred 
yards of that was over open ground on which there was not a 
single tree or bush. The tigress was coming towards us at a 
slight angle and would see any movement we made, so there 
was nothing I could do but watch her, and no tigress had ever 
moved more slowly. She was known to the people of Muktesar 
as the lame tiger, but I could see no sign of her being lame. The 
plan that was forming in my head as I watched her was to wait 
until she entered the scrub jungle, and then run forward and 
try to get a shot at her either before or after she crossed the 
stream. Had there been sufficient cover between me and the 
point the tigress was making for, I would have gone forward as 
soon as I saw her and tried either to get a shot at her on the 
open ground or, failing that, to intercept her at the stream. But 
unfortunately there was not sufficient cover to mask my 
movements, so I had to wait until the tigress entered the 
bushes between the open ground and the stream. Telling the 
men not to move or make a sound until I returned, I set off at a 
run as the tigress disappeared from view. The hill was steep 
and as I ran along the contour I came to a wild rose bush which 
extended up and down the hill for many yards. Through the 
middle of the bush there was a low tunnel, and as I bent down 
to run through it my hat was knocked off, and raising my head 
too soon at the end of the tunnel I was nearly dragged off my 
feet by the thorns that entered my head. The thorns of these 
wild roses are curved and very strong and as I was not able to 
stop myself some embedded themselves and broke off in my 
head— where my sister Maggie had difficulty in removing them 
when I got home— while others tore through the flesh. With 
little trickles of blood running down my face I continued to run 
until I approached the hollow into which I had rolled the partly 
eaten kill from the hill above. This hollow was about forty yards 
long and thirty yards wide. The upper end of it where the kill 
was lying, the hill above the kill, and the further bank, were 
overgrown with dense brushwood. The lower half of the hollow 
and the bank on my side were free of bushes. As I reached the 



edge of the hollow and peered over, I heard a bone crack. The 
tigress had reached the hollow before me and, on finding the 
old kill, was trying to make up for the meal she had been 
deprived of the previous night. 

If after leaving the kill, on which there was very little flesh, the 
tigress came out on to the open ground I would get a shot at 
her, but if she went up the hill or up the far bank I would not 
see her. From the dense brushwood in which I could hear the 
tigress, a narrow path ran up the bank on my side and paused 
within a yard to my left; a yard beyond the path, there was 
a sheer drop of fifty feet into the stream below. I was 
considering the possibility of driving the tigress out of the 
brushwood on to the open ground by throwing a stone on to the 
hill above her, when I heard a sound behind me. On looking 
round I saw Govind standing behind me with my hat in his 
hand. At that time no European in India went about without a 
hat, and having seen mine knocked off by the rose bush Govind 
had retrieved it and brought it to me. Near us there was a hole 
in the hill. Putting my finger to my lips I got Govind by the arm 
and pressed him into the hole. Sitting on his hunkers with his 
chin resting on his drawn-up knees, hugging my hat, he just 
fitted into the hole and looked a very miserable object, for he 
could hear the tigress crunching bones a few yards away. As I 
straightened up and resumed my position on the edge of the 
bank, the tigress stopped eating. She had either seen me 
or, what was more probable, she had not found the old kill to 
her liking. For a long minute there was no movement or sound, 
and then I caught sight of her. She had climbed up the opposite 
bank, and was now going along the top of it towards the hill. At 
this point there were a number of six-inch-thick poplar 
saplings, and I could only see the outline of the tigress as she 
went through them. With the forlorn hope that my bullet would 
miss the saplings and find the tigress I threw up my rifle and 
took a hurried shot. At my shot the tigress whipped round, 
came down the bank, across the hollow, and up the path on my 
side, as hard as she could go. I did not know, at the time, that 



my bullet had struck a sapling near her head, and that she was 
blind of one eye. So what looked like a very determined charge 
might only have been a frightened animal running away from 
danger, for in that restricted space she would not have known 
from which direction the report of my rifle had come. Be that 
as it may, what I took to be a wounded and a very angry tigress 
was coming straight at me; so, waiting until she was two yards 
away, I leant forward and with great good luck managed to put 
the remaining bullet in the rifle into the hollow where her neck 
joined her shoulder. The impact of the heavy -500 bullet 
deflected her just sufficiently for her to miss my left shoulder, 
and her impetus carried her over the fifty-foot drop into the 
stream below, where she landed with a great splash. Taking a 
step forward I looked over the edge and saw the tigress lying 
submerged in a pool with her feet in the air, while the water in 
the pool reddened with her blood. 

Govind was still sitting in the hole, and at a sign he joined me. 
On seeing the tigress he turned and shouted to the men on the 
ridge, 'The tiger is dead. The tiger is dead.' The thirty men on 
the ridge now started shouting, and Badri on hearing them got 
hold of his shot gun and fired off ten rounds. These shots were 
heard at Muktesar and in the surrounding villages, and 
presently men from all sides were converging on the stream. 
Willing hands drew the tigress from the pool, lashed her to a 
sapling, and carried her in triumph to Badri's orchard. Here 
she was put down on a bed of straw for all to see, while I went 
to the guest house for a cup of tea. An hour later by the light of 
hand lanterns, and with a great crowd of men standing round, 
among whom were several sportsmen from Muktesar, I skinned 
the tigress. It was then that I found she was blind of one eye 
and that she had some fifty porcupine quills, varying in length 
from one to nine inches, embedded in the arm and under the 
pad of her right foreleg. By ten o'clock my job was finished, and 
declining Badri's very kind invitation to spend the night with 
him I climbed the hill in company with the people who had 
come down from Muktesar, among whom were my two men 



carrying the skin. On the open ground in front of the post office 
the skin was spread out for the Postmaster and his friends to 
see. At midnight I lay down in the Dak Bungalow reserved for 
the public, for a few hours' sleep. Four hours later I was on the 
move again and at midday I was back in my home at Naini Tal 
after an absence of seventy-two hours. 

The shooting of a man-eater gives one a feeling of satisfaction. 
Satisfaction at having done a job that badly needed doing. 
Satisfaction at having outmanoeuvred, on his own ground, a 
very worthy antagonist. And, the greatest satisfaction of all, at 
having made a small portion of the earth safe for a brave little 
girl to walk on. 



The Panar Man-Eater 


1 

WHILE I WAS HUNTING the Champawat man-eater in 1907, I 
heard of a man-eating leopard that was terrorizing the 
inhabitants of villages on the eastern border of Almora district. 
This leopard, about which questions were asked in the House 
of Commons, was known under several names and was credited 
with having killed four hundred human beings. I knew the 
animal under the name of the Panar man-eater, and I shall 
therefore use this name for the purpose of my story. 

No mention is made in government records of man-eaters prior 
to the year 1905 and it would appear that until the advent of 
the Champawat tiger and the Panar leopard, man-eaters were 
unknown in Kumaon. When therefore these two animals— who 
between them killed eight hundred and thirty-six human beings 
— made their appearance, the Government was faced with a 
difficult situation for it had no machinery to put in action 
against them and had to rely on personal appeals to sportsmen. 
Unfortunately there were very few sportsmen in Kumaon at 
that time who had any inclination for this new form of sport 
which, rightly or wrongly was considered as hazardous as 
Wilson's solo attempt— made a few years later— to conquer 
Everest. I myself was as ignorant of man-eaters as Wilson was 
of Everest and that I succeeded in my attempt, where he 
apparently failed in his, was due entirely to luck. 

When I returned to my home in Naini Tal after killing the 
Champawat tiger I was asked by the Government to undertake 
the shooting of the Panar leopard. I was working hard for a 
living at the time and several weeks elapsed before I was able 
to spare the time to undertake this task, and then just as I was 
ready to start for the outlying area of Almora district in which 
the leopard was operating, I received an urgent request from 
Berthoud, the Deputy Commissioner of Naini Tal, to go to the 
help of the people of Muktesar where a man-eating tiger had 
established a reign of terror. After hunting down the tiger, an 



account of which I have given, I went in pursuit of the Panar 
leopard. 

As I had not previously visited the vast area over which this 
leopard was operating, I went via Almora to learn all I could 
about the leopard from Stiffe, the Deputy Commissioner of 
Almora. He kindly invited me to lunch, provided me with maps, 
and then gave me a bit of a jolt when wishing me goodbye by 
asking me if I had considered all the risks and prepared for 
them by making my will. 

My maps showed that there were two approaches to the 
affected area, one via Panwanaula on the Pithoragarh road, and 
the other via Lamgara on the Dabidhura road. I selected the 
latter route and after lunch set out in good heart— despite the 
reference to a will— accompanied by one servant and four men 
carrying my luggage. My men and I had already done a still 
march of fourteen miles from Khairna, but being young and fit 
were prepared to do another long march before calling it a day. 

As the full moon was rising we arrived at a small isolated 
building which, from the scribbling on the walls and the torn 
bits of paper lying about, we assumed was used as a school. I 
had no tent with me and as the door of the building was locked 
I decided to spend the night in the courtyard with my men, a 
perfectly safe proceeding for we were still many miles from the 
man-eater's hunting grounds. This courtyard, which was about 
twenty feet square, abutted on the public road and was 
surrounded on three sides by a two-foot-high wall. On the 
fourth side it was bounded by the school building. 

There was plenty of fuel in the jungle behind the school and my 
men soon had a fire burning in a corner of the courtyard for my 
servant to cook my dinner. I was sitting with my back to the 
locked door, smoking, and my servant had just laid a leg of 
mutton on the low wall nearest the road and turned to attend 
to the fire, when I saw the head of a leopard appear over the 
wall close to the leg of mutton. Fascinated, I sat motionless and 
watched— for the leopard was facing me— and when the man 



had moved away a few feet the leopard grabbed the meat and 
bounded across the road into the jungle beyond. The meat had 
been put down on a big sheet of paper, which had stuck to it, 
and when my servant heard the rustle of paper and saw what 
he thought was a dog running away with it he dashed forward 
shouting, but on realizing that he was dealing with a leopard 
and not with a mere dog he changed direction and dashed 
towards me with even greater speed. All white people in the 
East are credited with being a little mad— for other reasons 
than walking about in the midday sun— and I am afraid my 
good servant thought I was a little more mad than most of my 
kind when he found I was laughing, for he said in a very 
aggrieved voice, 'It was your dinner that the leopard carried 
away and I have nothing else for you to eat. 1 However, he duly 
produced a meal that did him credit, and to which I did as 
much justice as I am sure the hungry leopard did to his leg of 
prime mutton. 

Making an early start next morning, we halted at Lamgara for a 
meal, and by evening reached the Dol Dak Bungalow on the 
border of the man-eater's domain. Leaving my men at the 
bungalow I set out the following morning to try to get news of 
the man-eater. Going from village to village, and examining the 
connecting footpaths for leopard pug-marks, I arrived in the 
late evening at an isolated homestead consisting of a single 
stone-built slate-roofed house, situated in a few acres of 
cultivated land and surrounded by scrub jungle. On the 
footpath leading to this homestead I found the pug-marks of a 
big male leopard. 

As I approached the house a man appeared on the narrow 
balcony and, climbing down a few wooden steps, came across 
the courtyard to meet me. He was a young man, possibly 
twenty-two years of age, and in great distress. It appeared that 
the previous night while he and his wife were sleeping on the 
floor of the single room that comprised the house, with the 
door open for it was April and very hot, the man-eater climbed 
on to the balcony and getting a grip of his wife's throat started 



to pull her head-foremost out of the room. With a strangled 
scream the woman flung an arm round her husband who, 
realizing in a flash what was happening, seized her arm with 
one hand and placing the other against the lintel of the door, 
for leverage, jerked her away from the leopard and closed the 
door. For the rest of the night the man and his wife cowered in 
a corner of the room, while the leopard tried to tear down the 
door. In the hot unventilated room the woman's wounds started 
to turn septic and by morning her suffering and fear had 
rendered her unconscious. 

Throughout the day the man remained with his wife, too 
frightened to leave her for fear the leopard should return and 
carry her away, and too frightened to face the mile of scrub 
jungle that lay between him and his nearest neighbour. As day 
was closing down and the unfortunate man was facing another 
night of terror he saw me coming towards the house, and when 
I had heard his story I was no longer surprised that he had run 
towards me and thrown himself sobbing at my feet. 

A difficult situation faced me. I had not up to that time 
approached Government to provide people living in areas in 
which a man-eater was operating with first-aid sets, so there 
was no medical or any other kind of aid nearer than Almora, 
and Almora was twenty-five miles away. To get help for the 
woman I would have to go for it myself and that would mean 
condemning the man to lunacy, for he had already stood as 
much as any man could stand and another night in that room, 
with the prospect of the leopard returning and trying to gain 
entrance, would of a certainty have landed him in a mad-house. 

The man's wife, a girl of about eighteen, was lying on her back 
when the leopard clamped its teeth into her throat, and when 
the man got a grip of her arm and started to pull her back, the 
leopard— to get a better purchase— drove the claws of one 
paw into her breast. In the final struggle the claws ripped 
through the flesh, making four deep cuts. In the heat of the 
small room, which had only one door and no windows and in 



which a swarm of flies were buzzing, all the wounds in the 
girl's throat and on her breast had turned septic, and whether 
medical aid could be procured or not, the chances of her 
surviving were very slight; so, instead of going for help, I 
decided to stay the night with the man. I very sincerely hope 
that no one who reads this story will ever be condemned to 
seeing and hearing the sufferings of a human being, or of an 
animal, that has had the misfortune of being caught by the 
throat by either a leopard or a tiger and not having the means 
— other than a bullet— of alleviating or of ending the suffering. 

The balcony which ran the length of the house, and which was 
boarded up at both ends, was about fifteen feet long and four 
feet wide, accessible by steps hewn in a pine sapling. Opposite, 
these steps was the one door of the house, and under the 
balcony was an open recess four feet wide and four feet high, 
used for storing firewood. 

The man begged me to stay in the room with him and his wife 
but it was not possible for me to do this, for, though I am not 
squeamish, the smell in the room was overpowering and more 
than I could stand. So between us we moved the firewood from 
one end of the recess under the balcony, clearing a small space 
where I could sit with my back to the wall. Night was now 
closing in, so after a wash and a drink at a near-by spring I 
settled down in my corner and told the man to go up to his wife 
and keep the door of the room open. As he climbed the steps 
the man said. The leopard will surely kill you. Sahib, and then 
what will I do?' 'Close the door,' I answered, 'and wait for the 
morning.' 

The moon was two nights off the full and there would be a 
short period of darkness. It was this period of darkness that 
was worrying me. If the leopard had remained scratching at 
the door until daylight, as the man said it had, it would not 
have gone far and even now it might be lurking in the bushes 
watching me. I had been in position for half an hour, straining 
my eyes into the darkening night and praying for the moon to 



top the hills to the east, when a jackal gave its alarm call. This 
call, which is given with the full force of the animal's lungs, can 
be heard for a very long distance and can be described as 
'pheaon, pheaon', repeated over and over again as long as the 
danger that has alarmed the jackal is in sight. Leopards when 
hunting or when approaching a kill move very slowly, and it 
would be many minutes before this one— assuming it was the 
man-eater— covered the half mile between us, and even if in 
the meantime the moon had not risen it would be giving 
sufficient light to shoot by, so I was able to relax and breathe 
more freely. 

Minutes dragged by. The jackal stopped calling. The moon rose 
over the hills, flooding the ground in front of me with brilliant 
light. No movement to be seen anywhere, and the only sound to 
be heard in all the world was the agonized fight for breath of 
the unfortunate girl above me. Minutes gave way to hours. The 
moon climbed the heavens and then started to go down in the 
west, casting the shadow of the house on the ground I was 
watching. Another period of danger, for if the leopard had seen 
me he would, with a leopard's patience, be waiting for these 
lengthening shadows to mask his movements. Nothing 
happened, and one of the longest nights I have ever watched 
through came to an end when the light from the sun lit up the 
sky where, twelve hours earlier, the moon had risen. 

The man, after his vigil of the previous night, had slept soundly 
and as I left my corner and eased my aching bones— only those 
who have sat motionless on hard ground for hours know how 
bones can ache— he came down the steps. Except for a few 
wild raspberries I had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, and 
as no useful purpose would have been served by my remaining 
any longer, I bade the man goodbye and set off to rejoin my 
men at the Dol Dak Bungalow, eight miles away, and summon 
aid for the girl. I had only gone a few miles when I met my 
men. Alarmed at my long absence they had packed up my 
belongings, paid my dues at the Dak Bungalow, and then set 
out to look for me. While I was talking to them the Road 



Overseer, whom I have mentioned in my story of the Temple 
tiger, came along. He was well mounted on a sturdy Bhootia 
pony, and as he was on his way to Almora he gladly undertook 
to carry a letter from me to Stiffe. Immediately on receipt of my 
letter Stiffe dispatched medical aid for the girl, but her 
sufferings were over when it arrived. 

It was this Road Overseer who informed me about the human 
kill that took me to Dabidhura, where I met with one of the 
most interesting and the most exciting shikar experiences I 
have ever had. After that experience I asked the old priest of 
the Dabidhura temple if the man-eater had as effective 
protection from his temple as the tiger I had failed to shoot, 
and he answered, 'No, no. Sahib. This Shaitan (devil) has killed 
many people who worshipped at my temple and when you come 
back to shoot him, as you say you will, I shall offer prayers for 
your success morning and evening. 1 

2 

No matter how full of happiness our life may have been, there 
are periods in it that we look back to with special pleasure. 

Such a period for me was the year 1910, for in that year I shot 
the Muktesar man-eating tiger and the Panar man-eating 
leopard, and in between these two— for me— great events, my 
men and I set up an all-time record at Mokameh Ghat by 
handling, without any mechanical means, five thousand five 
hundred tonnes of goods in a single working day. 

My first attempt to shoot the Panar leopard was made in April 
1910, and it was not until September of the same year that I 
was able to spare the time to make a second attempt. I have no 
idea how many human beings were killed by the leopard 
between April and September, for no bulletins were issued by 
Government and beyond a reference to questions asked in the 
House of Commons no mention of the leopard— as far as I am 
aware— was made in the Indian press. The Panar leopard was 
credited with having killed four hundred human beings, against 
one hundred and twenty-five killed by the Rudraprayag 


leopard, and the fact that the former received such scant 
publicity while the latter was headline news throughout India 
was due entirely to the fact that the Panar leopard operated in 
a remote area far from the beaten track, whereas the 
Rudraprayag leopard operated in an area visited each year by 
sixty thousand pilgrims ranging from the humblest in the land 
to the highest, all of whom had to run the gauntlet of the man- 
eater. It was these pilgrims, and the daily bulletins issued by 
the Government, that made the Rudraprayag leopard so 
famous, though it caused far less human suffering than the 
Panar leopard. 

Accompanied by a servant and four men carrying my camp kit 
and provisions, I set out from Naini Tal on 10 September on my 
second attempt to shoot the Panar leopard. The sky was 
overcast when we left home at 4 a.m. and we had only gone a 
few miles when a deluge of rain came on. Throughout the day it 
rained and we arrived at Almora, after a twenty-eight-mile 
march, wet to the bone. I was to have spent the night with 
Stiffe, but not having a stitch of dry clothing to put on I 
excused myself and spent the night at the Dak Bungalow. There 
were no other travellers there and the man in charge very 
kindly put two rooms at my disposal, with a big wood fire in 
each, and by morning my kit was dry enough for me to 
continue my journey. 

It had been my intention to follow the same route from Almora 
that I had followed in April, and start my hunt for the leopard 
from the house in which the girl had died of her wounds. While 
I was having breakfast a mason by the name of Panwa, who did 
odd jobs for us in Naini Tal, presented himself. Panwa's home 
was in the Panar valley, and on learning from my men that I 
was on my way to try to shoot the man-eater he asked for 
permission to join our party, for he wanted to visit his home 
and was frightened to undertake the journey alone. Panwa 
knew the country and on his advice I altered my plans and 
instead of taking the road to Dabidhura via the school where 
the leopard had eaten my dinner, I took the road leading to 



Pithoragarh. Spending the night at the Panwa Naula Dak 
Bungalow, we made an early start next morning and after 
proceeding a few miles left the Pithoragarh road for a track 
leading off to the right. We were now in the man-eater's 
territory where there were no roads, and where the only 
communication was along footpaths running from village to 
village. 

Progress was slow, for the villages were widely scattered over 
many hundreds of square miles of country, and as the exact 
whereabouts of the man-eater were not known it was necessary 
to visit each village to make inquiries. Going through Salan and 
Rangot pattis (patti is a group of villages), I arrived late on the 
evening of the fourth day at Chakati, where I was informed by 
the headman that a human being had been killed a few days 
previously at a village called Sanouli on the far side of the 
Panar river. Owing to the recent heavy rain the Panar was in 
flood and the headman advised me to spend the night in his 
village, promising to give me a guide next morning to show me 
the only safe ford over the river, for the Panar was not bridged. 

The headman and I had carried on our conversation at one end 
of a long row of double-storied buildings and when, on his 
advice, I elected to stay the night in the village, he said he 
would have two rooms vacated in the upper storey for myself 
and my men. I had noticed while talking to him that the end 
room on the ground floor was untenanted, so I told him I would 
stay in it and that he need only have one room vacated in the 
upper storey for my men. The room I had elected to spend the 
night in had no door, but this did not matter for I had been told 
that the last kill had taken place on the far side of the river and 
I knew the man-eater would not attempt to cross the river 
while it was in flood. 

The room had no furniture of any kind, and after my men had 
swept all the straw and bits of rags out of it, complaining as 
they did so that the last tenant must have been a very dirty 
person, they spread my groundsheet on the mud floor and 



made up my bed. I ate my dinner— which my servant cooked 
on an open fire in the courtyard— sitting on my bed, and as I 
had done a lot of walking during the twelve hours I had been 
on my feet, it did not take me long to get to sleep. The sun was 
just rising next morning, flooding the room with light, when on 
hearing a slight sound in the room I opened my eyes and saw a 
man sitting on the floor near my bed. He was about fifty years 
of age, and in the last stage of leprosy. On seeing that I was 
awake this unfortunate living death said he hoped I had spent a 
comfortable night in his room. He went on to say that he had 
been on a two-days' visit to friends in an adjoining village, and 
finding me asleep in his room on his return had sat near my 
bed and waited for me to awake. 

Leprosy, the most terrible and the most contagious of all 
diseases in the East, is very prevalent throughout Kumaon, and 
especially bad in Almora district. Being fatalists the people look 
upon the disease as a visitation from God, and neither 
segregate the afflicted nor take any precautions against 
infection. So quite evidently, the headman did not think it 
necessary to warn me that the room I had selected to stay in 
had for years been the home of a leper. It did not take me long 
to dress that morning, and as soon as our guide was ready we 
left the village. 

Moving about as I have done in Kumaon I have always gone in 
dread of leprosy, and I have never felt as unclean as I did after 
my night in that poor unfortunate's room. At the first stream 
we came to I called a halt, for my servant to get breakfast 
ready for me and for my men to have their food. Then, telling 
my men to wash my groundsheet and lay my bedding out in the 
sun, I took a bar of carbolic soap and went down the stream to 
where there was a little pool surrounded by great slabs of rock. 
Taking off every stitch of clothing I had worn in that room, I 
washed it all in the pool and, after laying it out on the slabs of 
rock, I used the remainder of the soap to scrub myself as I had 
never scrubbed myself before. Two hours later, in garments 
that had shrunk a little from the rough treatment they had 



received, I returned to my men feeling clean once again, and 
with a hunter's appetite for breakfast. 

Our guide was a man about four feet six inches tall with a big 
head crowned with a mop of long hair; a great barrel of a body, 
short legs, and few words. When I asked him if we had any stiff 
climbing to do, he stretched out his open hand, and answered, 
'Flat as that.' Having said this he led us down a very steep hill 
into a deep valley. Here I expected him to turn and follow the 
valley down to its junction with the river. But no. Without 
saying a word or even turning his head he crossed the open 
ground and went straight up the hill on the far side. This hill, in 
addition to being very steep and overgrown with thorn bushes, 
had loose gravel on it which made the going difficult, and as 
the sun was now overhead and very hot, we reached the top in 
a bath of sweat. Our guide, whose legs appeared to have been 
made for climbing hills, had not turned a hair. 

There was an extensive view from the top of the hill, and when 
our guide informed us that we still had the two high hills in the 
foreground to climb before reaching the Panar river, Panwa, 
the mason, who was carrying a bundle containing presents for 
his family and a great coat made of heavy dark material, 
handed the coat to the guide and said that as he was making us 
climb all the hills in Kumaon he could carry the coat for the 
rest of the way. Unwinding a length of goat hair cord from 
round his body the guide folded up the coat and strapped it 
securely to his back. Down and up we went, and down and up 
again, and then away down in a deep valley we saw the river. 

So far we had been going over trackless ground, without a 
village in sight, but we now came on a narrow path running 
straight down to the river. The nearer we got to the river the 
less I liked the look of it. The path leading to the water and up 
the far side showed that there was a ford here, but the river 
was in flood and the crossing appeared to me to be a very 
hazardous one. The guide assured us, however, that it was 
perfectly safe to cross, so removing my shoes and stockings I 
linked arms with Panwa and stepped into the water. The river 



was about forty yards wide and from its broken surface I 
judged it was running over a very rough bed. In this I was 
right, and after stubbing my toes a few times and narrowly 
avoiding being washed off our feet, we struggled out on the far 
bank. 

Our guide had followed us into the river and on looking back, I 
saw that the little man was in difficulties. The water which for 
us had been thigh deep was for him waist deep and on reaching 
the main stream, instead of bracing his back against it and 
walking crab fashion, he very foolishly faced up-stream with 
the result that he was swept over backwards and submerged 
under the fast-running current. I was barefoot and helpless on 
the sharp stones, but Panwa— to whom sharp stones were no 
obstacle— threw down the bundle he was carrying and without 
a moment's hesitation sprinted along the bank to where fifty 
yards farther down, a big slab of rock jutted into the river at 
the head of a terrifying rapid. Running out on to this wet and 
slippery rock Panwa lay down, and as the drowning man was 
swept past, grabbed him by his long hair and after a desperate 
struggle drew him on to the rock. When the two men rejoined 
me— the guide looking like a drowned rat— I complimented 
Panwa on his noble and brave act in having saved the little 
man's life, at great risk to his own. After looking at me in some 
surprise Panwa said, 'Oh, it was not his life that I wanted to 
save, but my new coat that was strapped to his back.' Anyway, 
whatever the motive, a tragedy had been averted, and after my 
men had linked arms and crossed safely I decided to call it a 
day and spend the night on the river bank. Panwa, whose 
village was five miles farther up the river, now left me, taking 
with him the guide, who was frightened to attempt a second 
crossing of the river. 

3 

Next morning we set out to find Sanouli, where the last human 
kill had taken place. Late in the evening of that day we found 
ourselves in a wide open valley, and as there were no human 
habitations in sight, we decided to spend the night on the open 


ground. We were now in the heart of the man-eater's country 
and after a very unrestful night, spent on cold wet ground, 
arrived about midday at Sanouli. The inhabitants of this small 
village were overjoyed to see us and they very gladly put a 
room at the disposal of my men, and gave me the use of an 
open platform with a thatched roof. 

The village was built on the side of a hill overlooking a valley in 
which there were terraced fields, from which a paddy crop had 
recently been harvested. The hill on the far side of the valley 
sloped up gradually, and a hundred yards from the cultivated 
land there was a dense patch of brushwood, some twenty acres 
in extent. On the brow of the hill, above this patch of 
brushwood, there was a village, and on the shoulder of the hill 
to the right another village. To the left of the terraced fields the 
valley was closed in by a steep grassy hill. So, in effect, the 
patch of brushwood was surrounded on three sides by 
cultivated land, and on the fourth by open grass land. 

While breakfast was being got ready, the men of the village sat 
round me and talked. During the second half of March and the 
first half of April, four human beings had been killed in this 
area by the man-eater. The first kill had taken place in the 
village on the shoulder of the hill, the second and third in the 
village on the brow of the hill, and the fourth in Sanouli. All 
four victims had been killed at night and carried some five 
hundred yards into the patch of brushwood, where the leopard 
had eaten them at his leisure, for— having no firearms— the 
inhabitants of the three villages were too frightened to make 
any attempt to recover the bodies. The last kill had taken place 
six days before, and my informants were convinced that the 
leopard was still in the patch of brushwood. 

I had purchased two young male goats in a village we passed 
through earlier that day, and towards evening I took the 
smaller one and tied it at the edge of the path of brushwood to 
test the villager's assertion that the leopard was still in the 
cover. I did not sit over the goat, because there were no 



suitable trees nearby and also because clouds were banking up 
and it looked as though there might be rain during the night. 
The platform that had been placed at my disposal was open all 
round, so I tied the second goat near it in the hope that if the 
leopard visited the village during the night it would prefer a 
tender goat to a tough human being. Long into the night I 
listened to the two goats calling to each other. This convinced 
me that the leopard was not within hearing distance. However, 
there was no reason why he should not return to the locality, so 
I went to sleep hoping for the best. 

There was a light shower during the night and when the sun 
rose in a cloudless sky every leaf and blade of grass was 
sparkling with raindrops and every bird that had a song to sing 
was singing a joyful welcome to the day. The goat near my 
platform was contentedly browsing off a bush and bleating 
occasionally; while the one across the valley was silent. Telling 
my servant to keep my breakfast warm, I crossed the valley and 
went to the spot where I had tied up the smaller goat. Here I 
found that, some time before the rain came on, a leopard had 
killed the goat, broken the rope, and carried away the kill. The 
rain had washed out the drag-mark, but this did not matter for 
there was only one place to which the leopard could have taken 
his kill, and that was into the dense patch of brushwood. 

Stalking a leopard, or a tiger, on its kill is one of the most 
interesting forms of sport I know of, but it can only be indulged 
in with any hope of success when the conditions are favourable. 
Here the conditions were not favourable, for the brushwood 
was too dense to permit of a noiseless approach. Returning to 
the village, I had breakfast and then called the villagers 
together, as I wanted to consult them about the surrounding 
country. It was necessary to visit the kill to see if the leopard 
had left sufficient for me to sit over and, while doing so, I 
would not be able to avoid disturbing the leopard. What I 
wanted to learn from the villagers was whether there was any 
other heavy cover, within a reasonable distance, to which the 
leopard could retire on being disturbed by me. I was told that 



there was no such cover nearer than two miles, and that to get 
to it the leopard would have to cross a wide stretch of 
cultivated land. 

At midday I returned to the patch of brushwood and, a hundred 
yards from where he had killed it, I found all that the leopard 
had left of the goat— its hooves, horns, and part of its stomach. 
As there was no fear of the leopard leaving the cover at that 
time of day for the jungle two miles away, I tried for several 
hours to stalk it, helped by bulbuls, drongos, thrushes, and 
scimitar-babblers, all of whom kept me informed of the 
leopard's every movement. In case any should question why I 
did not collect the men of the three villages and get them to 
drive the leopard out on to the open ground, where I could 
have shot it, it is necessary to say that this could not have been 
attempted without grave danger to the beaters. As soon as the 
leopard found he was being driven towards open ground, he 
would have broken back and attacked anyone who got in his 
way. 

On my return to the village after my unsuccessful attempt to 
get a shot at the leopard, I went down with a bad attack of 
malaria and for the next twenty-four hours I lay on the platform 
in a stupor. By the evening of the following day the fever had 
left me and I was able to continue the hunt. On their own 
initiative the previous night my men had tied out the second 
goat where the first had been killed, but the leopard had not 
touched it. This was all to the good, for the leopard would now 
be hungry, and I set out on that third evening full of hope. 

On the near side of the patch of brushwood, and about a 
hundred yards from where the goat had been killed two nights 
previously there was an old oak tree. This tree was growing out 
of a six-foot-high bank between two terraced fields and was 
leaning away from the hill at an angle that made it possible for 
me to walk up the trunk in my rubber soled shoes. On the 
underside of the trunk and about fifteen feet from the ground 
there was a branch jutting out over the lower field. This 



branch, which was about a foot thick, offered a very 
uncomfortable and a very unsafe seat for it was hollow and 
rotten. However, as it was the only branch on the tree, and as 
there were no other trees within a radius of several hundred 
yards, I decided to risk the branch. 

As I had every reason to believe— from the similarity of the 
pug-marks I had found in the brushwood to those I had seen in 
April on the path leading to the homestead where the girl was 
killed— that the leopard I was dealing with was the Panar man- 
eater, I made my men cut a number of long blackthorn shoots. 
After I had taken my seat with my back to the tree and my legs 
stretched out along the branch, I made the men tie the shoots 
into bundles and lay them on the trunk of the tree and lash 
them to it securely with strong rope. To the efficient carrying 
out of these small details I am convinced I owe my life. 

Several of the blackthorn shoots, which were from ten to 
twenty feet long, projected on either side of the tree; and as I 
had nothing to hold on to, to maintain my balance, I gathered 
the shoots on either side of me and held them firmly pressed 
between my arms and my body. By five o'clock my preparations 
were complete. I was firmly seated on the branch with my coat 
collar pulled up well in front to protect my throat, and my soft 
hat pulled down well behind to protect the back of my neck. 
The goat was tied to a stake driven into the field thirty yards in 
front of me, and my men were sitting out in the field smoking 
and talking loudly. 

Up to this point all had been quiet in the patch of brushwood, 
but now, a scimitar-babbler gave its piercing alarm call 
followed a minute or two later by the chattering of several 
white-throated laughing thrushes. These two species of birds 
are the most reliable informants in the hills, and on hearing 
them I signalled to my men to return to the village. This they 
appeared to be very glad to do, and as they walked away, still 
talking loudly, the goat started bleating. Nothing happened for 
the next half-hour and then, as the sun was fading off the hill 



above the village, two drongos that had been sitting on the tree 
above me, flew off and started to bait some animal on the open 
ground between me and the patch of brushwood. The goat 
while calling had been facing in the direction of the village, and 
it now turned round, facing me, and stopped calling. By 
watching the goat I could follow the movements of the animal 
that the drongos were baiting and that the goat was interested 
in, and this animal could only be a leopard. The moon was in 
her third quarter and there would be several hours of darkness. 
In anticipation of the leopard's coming when light conditions 
were not favourable, I had armed myself with a twelve-bore 
double-barrelled shot gun loaded with slugs, for there was a 
better chance of my hitting the leopard with eight slugs than 
with a single rifle bullet. Aids to night shooting, in the way of 
electric lights and torches, were not used in India at the time I 
am writing about, and all that one had to rely on for accuracy 
of aim was a strip of white cloth tied round the muzzle of the 
weapon. 

Again nothing happened for many minutes, and then I felt a 
gentle pull on the blackthorn shoots I was holding and blessed 
my forethought in having had the shoots tied to the leaning 
tree, for I could not turn round to defend myself and at best the 
collar of my coat and my hat were poor protection. No question 
now that I was dealing with a man-eater, and a very determined 
man-eater at that. Finding that he could not climb over the 
thorns, the leopard, after his initial pull, had now got the butt 
ends of the shoots between his teeth and was jerking them 
violently, pulling me hard against the trunk of the tree. And 
now the last of the daylight faded out of the sky and the 
leopard, who did all his human killing in the dark, was in his 
element and I was out of mine, for in the dark a human being is 
the most helpless of all animals and— speaking for myself— his 
courage is at its lowest ebb. Having killed four hundred human 
beings at night, the leopard was quite unafraid of me, as was 
evident from the fact that while tugging at the shoots, he was 
growling loud enough to be heard by the men anxiously 



listening in the village. While this growling terrified the men, 
as they told me later, it had the opposite effect on me, for it let 
me know where the leopard was and what he was doing. It was 
when he was silent that I was most terrified, for I did not know 
what his next move would be. Several times he had nearly 
unseated me by pulling on the shoots vigorously and then 
suddenly letting them go, and now that it was dark and I had 
nothing stable to hold on to, I felt sure that if he sprang up he 
would only need to touch me to send me crashing to the 
ground. 

After one of these nerve-racking periods of silence the leopard 
jumped down off the high bank and dashed towards the goat. 

In the hope that the leopard would come while there was still 
sufficient light to shoot by, I had tied the goat thirty yards from 
the tree to give me time to kill the leopard before it got to the 
goat. But now, in the dark, I could not save the goat— which, 
being white, I could only just see as an indistinct blur— so I 
waited until it had stopped struggling and then aimed where I 
thought the leopard would be and pressed the trigger. My shot 
was greeted with an angry grunt and I saw a white flash as the 
leopard went over backwards, and disappeared down another 
high bank into the field beyond. 

For ten or fifteen minutes I listened anxiously for further 
sounds from the leopard, and then my men called out and 
asked if they should come to me. It was now guite safe for them 
to do so, provided they kept to the high ground. So I told them 
to light pine torches, and thereafter carry out my instructions. 
These torches, made of twelve to eighteen inches long splinters 
of resin-impregnated pine-wood cut from a living tree, give a 
brilliant light and provide the remote villages in Kumaon with 
the only illumination they have ever known. 

After a lot of shouting and running about, some twenty men 
each carrying a torch left the village and, following my 
instructions, circled round above the terraced fields and 
approached my tree from behind. The knots in the ropes 



securing the blackthorn shoots to the tree had been pulled so 
tight by the leopard that they had to be cut. After the thorns 
had been removed men climbed the tree and helped me down, 
for the uncomfortable seat had given me cramps in my legs. 

The combined light from the torches lit up the field on which 
the dead goat was lying, but the terraced field beyond was in 
shadow. When cigarettes had been handed round I told the men 
I had wounded the leopard but did not know how badly, and 
that we would return to the village now and I would look for 
the wounded animal in the morning. At this, great 
disappointment was expressed. 'If you have wounded the 
leopard it must surely be dead by now. There are many of us, 
and you have a gun, so there is no danger . 1 'At least let us go as 
far as the edge of the field and see if the leopard has left a 
blood trail.' After all arguments for and against going to look 
for the leopard immediately had been exhausted, I consented 
against my better judgement to go as far as the edge of the 
field, from where we could look down on the terraced field 
below. 

Having acceded to their request, I made the men promise that 
they would walk in line behind me, hold their torches high, and 
not run away and leave me in the dark if the leopard charged. 
This promise they very willingly gave, and after the torches had 
been replenished and were burning brightly we set off, I 
walking in front and the men following five yards behind. 

Thirty yards to the goat, and another twenty yards to the edge 
of the field. Very slowly, and in silence, we moved forward. 
When we reached the goat— no time now to look for a blood 
trail— the farther end of the lower field came into view. The 
nearer we approached the edge, the more of this field became 
visible, and then, when only a narrow strip remained in shadow 
from the torches, the leopard, with a succession of angry 
grunts, sprang up the bank and into full view. 

There is something very terrifying in the angry grunt of a 
charging leopard, and I have seen a line of elephants that were 



staunch to tiger turn and stampede from a charging leopard; so 
I was not surprised when my companions, all of whom were 
unarmed, turned as one man and bolted. Fortunately for me, in 
their anxiety to get away they collided with each other and 
some of the burning splinters of pine— held loosely in their 
hands— fell to the ground and continued to flicker, giving me 
sufficient light to put a charge of slugs into the leopard's chest. 

On hearing my shot the men stopped running, and then I heard 
one of them say, 'Oh, no. He won't be angry with us, for he 
knows that this devil has turned our courage to water.' Yes, I 
knew, from my recent experience on the tree, that fear of a 
man-eater robs a man of courage. As for running away, had I 
been one of the torchbearers I would have run with the best. 

So there was nothing for me to be angry about. Presently, while 
I was making believe to examine the leopard, to ease their 
embarrassment, the men returned in twos and threes. When 
they were assembled, I asked, without looking up, 'Did you 
bring a bamboo pole and rope to carry the leopard back to the 
village?' 'Yes,' they answered eagerly, 'we left them at the foot 
of the tree . 1 'Go and fetch them,' I said, 'for I want to get back 
to the village for a cup of hot tea.' The cold night-wind blowing 
down from the north had brought on another attack of malaria, 
and now that all the excitement was over I was finding it 
difficult to remain on my feet. 

That night, for the first time in years, the people of Sanouli 
slept, and have since continued to sleep, free from fear. 



he Chuka Man-Eater 


1 

CHUKA— WHICH GAVE ITS NAME to the man-eating tiger of 
the Ladhya valley— is a small village of some ten ploughs on 
the right bank of the Sarda river near its junction with the 
Ladhya. From the north-west corner of the village a path runs 
for a quarter of a mile along a fire track before it divides, one 
arm going straight up a ridge to Thak village and the other 
diagonally up and across the hills to Kotekindri, a village 
owned by the people of Chuka. 

Along this latter path a man was driving two bullocks in the 
winter of 1936, and as he approached Chuka, a tiger suddenly 
appeared on the fire track. With very commendable courage 
the man interposed himself between the tiger and his bullocks 
and, brandishing his stick and shouting, attempted to drive the 
tiger away. Taking advantage of the diversion created in their 
favour the bullocks promptly bolted to the village and the tiger, 
baulked of his prey, turned his attention to the man. Alarmed at 
the threatening attitude of the tiger the man turned to run and, 
as he did so, the tiger sprang on him. Across his shoulders the 
man had a heavy wooden plough, and on his back he was 
carrying a bag containing the provisions he needed for his stay 
at Chuka. While the tiger was expending its teeth and claws on 
the plough and bag, the man, relieved of his burdens, sprinted 
towards the village shouting for help as he ran. His relatives 
and friends, hearing his shouts, rallied to his assistance and he 
reached the village without further incident. One claw of the 
tiger had ripped his right arm from shoulder to wrist, inflicting 
a deep wound. 

Some weeks later two men returning from the market at 
Tanakpur were climbing the steep path to Kotekindri, when a 
tiger crossed the path fifty yards ahead of them. Waiting for a 
few minutes to give the tiger time to move away from the 
vicinity of the path, the men proceeded on their way, shouting 
as they went. The tiger had not moved away, however, and as 



the leading man came abreast of it, it sprang on him. This man 
was carrying a sack of gur (unrefined sugar), half of which was 
on his head and the other half on his back. The tiger's teeth 
caught in the sack and he carried it away down the hillside, 
without doing the man any injury. There is no record of what 
the tiger thought of the captures he had made so far— a plough 
and a sack of gur— but it can be assumed he was not satisfied 
with his bag, for, from now on, he selected human beings who 
were not burdened with either ploughs or sacks. 

Thak, which is about three thousand feet above Chuka, has 
quite a large population for a hill village. The Chand Rajas who 
ruled Kumaon before the advent of the Gurkhas, gave the lands 
of Thak to the forefathers of the present holders for their 
maintenance, and appointed them hereditary custodians of the 
Purnagiri temples. Rich lands and a considerable income from 
the temples have enabled the people of Thak to build 
themselves good substantial houses, and to acquire large herds 
of cattle. 

On a day early in June 1937, seven men and two boys were 
herding the village cattle, two hundred yards to the west of 
Thak. At 10 a.m. it was noticed that some of the cattle were 
beginning to stray off the open ground towards the jungle and 
one of the boys, aged fourteen, was sent to turn them back. Six 
hours later the men, who had been sleeping through the heat of 
the day, were aroused by the barking of a kakar in the jungle 
bordering the open ground, into which all the cattle had by 
now strayed, and the second boy who was also about fourteen 
was sent to drive them out. Shortly after he entered the jungle 
the cattle stampeded and as they were crossing an open ravine 
on their way to the village a tiger sprang on one of the cows, 
and killed it in full view of the seven men. The bellowing of the 
cattle and the shouts of the men attracted the attention of the 
people in the village, and a crowd soon collected on the high 
ground overlooking the ravine. The mother— a widow— of the 
second boy was among these people and, on hearing the men 
calling to her son, she ran towards them to inquire what had 



happened. On learning that her son had entered the jungle to 
drive out the cattle and had not returned, she set off to look for 
him. At this moment the parents of the first boy arrived on the 
scene and it was only when they asked where their son was 
that the seven men remembered they had not seen him since 
10 a.m. 

Followed by the large crowd of men who had now collected in 
the ravine near the dead cow, the distraught mother went into 
the jungle and found her son where the tiger had killed and left 
him, and under a near-by bush the parents of the first boy 
found their son dead and partly eaten. Close to this boy was a 
dead calf. From the accounts the villagers subsequently gave 
me of the tragic happenings of that day, I believe that the tiger 
was lying up in the jungle overlooking the ground on which the 
cattle were grazing, and when the calf, unseen by the men, 
entered the jungle the tiger killed it, and before it was able to 
carry it away, the boy either inadvertently or through curiosity 
approached the calf, was killed, dragged under the bush, and 
partly eaten. After this the tiger apparently lay up near his two 
kills until 4 p.m. when a kakar on its way to drink at the small 
pool on the edge of the clearing either saw or smelt it and 
started barking. This aroused the men to the fact that the cattle 
had strayed into the jungle, and the second boy who was sent 
to drive them out had the ill luck to go straight to the spot 
where the tiger was guarding his kills. 

The killing of the second boy was evidently witnessed by the 
cattle, who rallied to his rescue— I have seen this happen with 
both cows and buffaloes— and after driving the tiger from the 
boy they stampeded. Enraged at being driven off his kills, and 
at the rough treatment he had quite possibly received in the 
process, the tiger followed the stampeding cattle and wreaked 
his vengeance on the first one he was able to get hold of. Had 
the herd not run right on into the village he would probably not 
have been satisfied with killing only one of his attackers. In a 
similar case of attempted rescue I once saw an entire herd of 
five buffaloes wiped out in a titanic fight with an enraged tiger. 



The tiger killed one of their number and the other four big- 
hearted animals attacked him and fought on until the last of 
them had been killed. The tiger evidently suffered severely in 
the fight, for when he left the battle-ground he left a trail of 
blood. 

The seemingly wanton slaughter of two human beings and two 
animals on the same day— resulting I am convinced from the 
tiger's having been disturbed on his first kill— caused a great 
outcry in the districts of Nairn Tal and Almora, and every effort 
was made to kill the tiger. On several occasions district officials 
sat up all night on machans over kills, and though the tiger had 
been wounded on two occasions— unfortunately only with 
buckshot— he continued to prey on human beings, and claimed 
yet another victim from the ill-fated village of Thak. 

Two hundred yards above Thak there is a wheat field. The crop 
had been cut from this field and two boys were grazing a few 
cattle on the stubble. For safety's sake the boys, who were 
brothers and orphans ten and twelve years of age, were sitting 
in the middle of the field. On the far side of the field, from the 
village, there was a light fringe of bushes. From these the hill 
went steeply up for a thousand feet, and from anywhere on the 
hill the two boys sitting in the open would have been visible. 
Towards the afternoon a cow strayed towards the bushes and 
the boys, keeping close together, set off to drive it back on to 
the field. The elder boy was leading and as he passed a bush 
the tiger, who was lying in wait, pounced on him and carried 
him away. The younger boy fled back to the village and dashing 
up to a group of men fell sobbing at their feet. When the boy 
was able to speak coherently he told the men that big red 
animal— it was the first tiger he had ever seen— had carried 
away his brother. A search party was hastily organized and 
with very commendable bravery the blood trail was followed 
for about a mile into the densely wooded Suwar Gadh ravine to 
the east of the village. Night was now closing in, so the party 
returned to Thak. The following day, assisted by men from 
adjoining villages, a day-long search was made but all that was 



found of the boy was his red cap and his torn and bloodstained 
clothes. That was the Chuka man-eater's last human victim. 

I do not think it is possible to appreciate courage until danger 
that brought it into being has been experienced. Those who 
have never lived in an area in which a man-eating tiger is 
operating may be inclined to think that there was nothing 
courageous in a mother going to look for her son, in two boys 
grazing cattle, or in a party of men going out to look for a 
missing boy. But to one who has lived in such an area the entry 
of the mother into a dense patch of jungle in which she knew 
there was an angry tiger; the two small boys sitting close 
together for protection; and the party of unarmed men 
following on the blood trail left by a man-eater were acts 
calling for a measure of courage that merits the greatest 
admiration. 

The Chuka man-eater was now disorganizing life for everyone 
in the Ladhya valley, and shortly after Ibbotson had been 
appointed Deputy Commissioner-in-Charge of the three 
districts of Naini Tal, Almora, and Garhwal, we joined forces to 
try to rid his division of the menace. 

It was early afternoon on a sweltering hot day in April 1937 
that Ibby, his wife Jean, and I, alighted from our motor bus at 
the Boom above Baramdeo. We had left Naini Tal in the early 
hours of the morning and, travelling via Haldwani and 
Tanakpur, arrived at the Boom at the hottest time of the day, 
covered in dust from head to foot, and with many sore spots in 
unseen and tender places. A cup of tea drunk while sitting on 
yielding sand on the bank of the Sarda river helped restore our 
spirits, and taking the short cut along the river bank we set off 
on foot to Thuli Gadh where our tents, sent in advance, had 
been pitched. 

Starting after breakfast next morning we went to Kaladhunga. 
The distance between Thuli Gadh and Kaladhunga via the 
Sarda gorge is eight miles, and via Purnagiri, fourteen miles. 


The Ibbotsons and I went through the gorge while our servants 
and the men carrying our kit went via Purnagiri. The gorge is 
four miles long and was at one time traversed by a tramway 
line blasted out of the rock cliff by J. V Collier when extracting 
the million cubic feet of sal timber presented by the Nepal 
Durbar to the Government of India as a thank-offering after the 
First World War. The tramway line has long since been swept 
away by landslides and floods, and these four miles necessitate 
a great deal of rock climbing where a false step or the slipping 
of a hand-hold would inevitably precipitate one into the cold 
river. We negotiated the gorge without mishap, and at the 
upper end, where Collier's tramline entered the forest, we 
caught two fish in a run where a rock of the size of a house juts 
out into the river. 

Word had been sent ahead for the patwaris and forest guards 
working in the area to meet us at Kaladhunga and give us the 
latest news of the man-eater. We found four men awaiting our 
arrival at the bungalow and the reports they gave us were 
encouraging. No human beings had been killed within the past 
few days, and the tiger was known to be in the vicinity of Thak 
village where three days previously it had killed a calf. 

Kaladhunga is a gently rising cone-shaped peninsula roughly 
four miles long and a mile wide, surrounded on three sides by 
the Sarda river and backed on the fourth by a ridge of hills five 
thousand feet high. The bungalow, a three-roomed house with a 
wide veranda, faces east and is situated at the northern or 
upper end of the peninsula. The view from the veranda as the 
morning sun rises over the distant hills and the mist is lifting is 
one of the most pleasing prospects it is possible to imagine. 
Straight in front, and across the Sarda, is a wide open valley 
running deep into Nepal. The hills on either side are densely 
wooded, and winding through the valley is a river fringed with 
emerald-green elephant grass. As far as the eye can see there 
are no human habitations and, judging from the tiger and other 
animal calls that can be heard from the bungalow, there 
appears to be an abundant stock of game in the valley. It was 



from this valley that Collier extracted the million cubic feet of 
timber. 


We spent a day at Kaladhunga, and while our men went on to 
Chuka to pitch our tents and make camp we fished, or, to be 
correct, the Ibbotsons fished while I, who had been laid up with 
malaria the previous night, sat on the bank and watched. From 
the broken water below the bungalow to the point of the 
peninsula— a stretch of some five hundred yards— the 
Ibbotsons, who are expert thread-line casters, combed the river 
with their one-inch spoons without moving a fish. The small 
river that flows down the Nepal valley joins the Sarda opposite 
the point of the peninsula. Here the Sarda widens out and 
shallows, and flows for two hundred yards over rocks before 
entering a big pool. It was at the upper end of this run and well 
out in the river that Ibby hooked his first fish— an eight- 
pounder— which needed careful handling on the light tackle 
before it was eventually brought to the bank and landed. 

All keen anglers delight in watching others of the craft 
indulging in this, one of the best of outdoor sports. As for 
myself, I would just as soon watch another fishing than fish 
myself, especially when fish are on the take, the foothold 
uncertain— as it always is in the Sarda— and the river fairly 
fast. Shortly after Ibby killed his fish, Jean— who was fishing in 
broken water thirty yards from the bank— hooked a fish. Her 
reel only held a hundred yards of thread line, and fearing that 
the fish would make for the pool and break her, she attempted 
to walk backwards while playing the fish, and in doing so lost 
her footing and for a long minute all that was visible of her was 
the toe of one foot and the point of her rod. You will naturally 
assume that I, forgetting my recent attack of malaria, dashed 
out to her rescue. As a matter of fact I did nothing of the kind 
and only sat on the bank and laughed, for to attempt to rescue 
either of the Ibbotsons from a watery grave would be as futile 
as trying to save an otter from drowning. After a long and a 
violent struggle Jean upended herself, and reaching the bank 
killed her fish, which weighed six pounds. Hardly had she done 



so when Ibby, in making a long cast, slipped off the rock on 
which he was standing and disappeared under water, rod and 
all. 

From the bottom end of the pool below the run, the river turns 
to the right. On the Nepal side of this bend in the river there 
had stood a giant semul tree, in the upper branches of which a 
pair of ospreys had for many years built their nest. The tree 
had been an ideal home for the birds, for not only had it 
commanded an extensive view of the river, but the great 
branches growing out at right angles to the trunk had also 
provided tables on which to hold and devour their slippery 
prey. The monsoon floods of the previous year had cut into the 
bank and washed away the old tree and the ospreys had built 
themselves a new nest in a tall shisham tree standing at the 
edge of the forest, a hundred yards from the river. 

The run was evidently the favourite fishing ground of ospreys, 
and while the female sat in the nest the male kept flying 
backwards and forwards over the Ibbotsons 1 heads. Eventually 
tiring of this unprofitable exercise it flew farther down the river 
to where a few partly submerged rocks broke the surface of the 
water, making a small run. Fish were evidently passing this 
spot, and a dozen times the osprey banked steeply, closed his 
wings, and dropped like a plummet and, checking himself with 
widespread wings and tail before reaching the water, rose 
flapping to regain height for his next cast. At last his patience 
was rewarded. An unwary fish had come to the surface directly 
below him, and without a moment's pause he went from flat 
flight into a lightning dive through a hundred feet of air and 
plunged deep into the broken water. His needle-sharp and 
steel-strong talons took hold, but the catch was evidently 
heavier than he anticipated. Time and time again with wildly 
threshing wings he attempted to launch himself into the air, 
only to sink down again on his breast feathers. I believe he 
would have had to relinquish his catch had not a gust of wind 
blowing up river come at this critical moment to help him. As 
the wind reached him he turned downstream and, making one 



last desperate effort, got the fish clear of the water. Home was 
in the opposite direction from that in which he was now 
heading but to turn was impossible, so, selecting a great slab of 
rock on the bank on which to land, he made straight for it. 

I was not the only one who had been watching the osprey, for 
he had hardly landed on the rock when a woman who had been 
washing clothes on the Nepal side of the river called out 
excitedly, and a boy appeared on the high bank above her. 
Running, down the steep track to where the woman was 
standing, he received his instructions and set off along the 
boulder-strewn bank at a pace that threatened his neck and 
limbs at every stride. The osprey made no attempt to carry off 
his prey, and as the boy reached the rock it took to the air, 
circling round his head as he held up the fish— which appeared 
to be about four pounds in weight— for the woman to see. 

For some time thereafter I lost sight of the osprey, and we had 
finished our lunch before I again saw him guartering the air 
above the run in which he had caught the fish of which the boy 
had deprived him. Back and forth he flew for many minutes, 
always at the same height, and then he banked, dropped fifty 
feet, again banked and then plunged straight into the water. 
This time his catch was lighter— a kalabas about two pounds in 
weight— and without effort he lifted it clear of the water and, 
holding it like a torpedo to reduce wind pressure, made for his 
nest. His luck was out that day, however, for he had only 
covered half the distance he had to go, when a Pallas fish-eagle 
twice his weight and size came up from behind, rapidly 
overtaking him. The osprey saw him coming and altering his 
course a point to the right headed for the forest with the object 
of shaking off his pursuer among the branches of the trees. The 
eagle realizing the object of this manoeuvre emitted a scream 
of rage and increased his speed. Only twenty yards more to go 
to reach safety, but the risk was too great to take and, 
relinguishing his hold of the kalabas, the osprey— only just in 
time— hurled himself straight into the air. The fish had not 
fallen a yard before the eagle caught it and, turning in a 



graceful sweep, made off down river in the direction from 
which he had come. He was not to escape with his booty as 
easily as he expected, however, for he had only gone a short 
distance on his return journey when the pair of crows that fed 
on the osprey's leavings set off to bait him, and to shake them 
off he too was compelled to take to the forest. At the edge of 
the forest the crows turned back and the eagle had hardly 
disappeared from view when falling out of the sky came two 
Tawny eagles going at an incredible speed in the direct line the 
Pallas eagle had taken. I very greatly regret I did not see the 
end of the chase for, from the fact that while I watched neither 
of the birds rose out of the forest, I suspect that the Pallas 
eagle retained his hold on the fish too long. I have only once 
seen a more interesting chase. On that occasion I was taking a 
line of eighteen elephants through grass and the ten guns and 
five spectators who were sitting on the elephants, shooting 
black partridge, saw a bush chat pass— without once touching 
the ground— from a sparrow-hawk that killed it just in front of 
our line of elephants to a red-headed merlin, then to a honey 
buzzard, and finally to a peregrine falcon who swallowed the 
little bird whole. If any of the guns or spectators who were with 
me that February morning read this chapter, they will recall the 
occurrence as having taken place on the Rudrapur Maidan. 

After an early breakfast next morning we moved from 
Kaladhunga to Chuka, an easy march of five miles. It was one 
of those gorgeous days that live long in the memory of a 
fisherman. The sun was pleasantly warm; a cool wind blowing 
down from the north; a run of chilwa (fingerlings) in progress; 
and the river full of big fish madly on the take. Fishing with 
light tackle we had many exciting battles, all of which we did 
not win. We ended the day, however, with enough fish to feed 
our camp of thirty men. 

3 

To assist us in our campaign against the man-eater, and to try 
to prevent further loss of human life, six young male buffaloes 
had been sent up from Tanakpur in advance of us, to be used as 


bait for the tiger. On our arrival at Chuka we were told that the 
buffaloes had been tied out for three nights, and that though a 
tiger's pug-marks had been seen near several of them, none 
had been killed. During the next four days we visited the 
buffaloes in the early morning; tried to get in touch with the 
tiger during the day, and in the evening accompanied the men 
engaged in tying out the buffaloes. On the fifth morning we 
found that a buffalo we had tied up at Thak, at the edge of the 
jungle in which the two boys had lost their lives, had been 
killed and carried off by a tiger. Instead of taking its kill into 
the dense jungle as we had expected, the tiger had taken it 
across an open patch of ground, and up on to a rocky knoll. 

This it had evidently done to avoid passing near a machan from 
which it had been fired at— and quite possibly wounded— on 
two previous occasions. After the buffalo had been dragged for 
a short distance its horns got jammed between two rocks, and 
being unable to free it, the tiger had eaten a few pounds of 
flesh from the hindquarters of the kill and then left it. In 
casting round to see in which direction the tiger had gone, we 
found its pug-marks in a buffalo wallow, between the kill and 
the jungle. These pug-marks showed that the killer of the 
buffalo was a big male tiger. 

It was generally believed by the District Officials— on what 
authority I do not know— that the man-eater was a tigress. On 
showing them the tracks in the buffalo wallow we were told by 
the villagers that they could not distinguish between the pug- 
marks of different tigers and that they did not know whether 
the man-eater was male or female, but that they did know it 
had a broken tooth. In all the kills, human as well as animal, 
that had taken place near their village they had noticed that 
one of the tiger's teeth only bruised the skin and did not 
penetrate it. From this they concluded that one of the man- 
eater's canine teeth was broken. 

Twenty yards from the kill there was a jamun tree. After we 
had dragged the kill out from between the rocks we sent a man 
up the tree to break a few twigs that were obstructing a view of 



the kill from the only branch of the tree in which it was 
possible to sit. This isolated tree on the top of the knoll was in 
full view of the surrounding jungle, and though the man 
climbed it and broke the twigs with the utmost care, I am 
inclined to think he was seen by the tiger. 

It was now 11 a.m., so, sending our men back to the village to 
have their midday meal, Ibby and I selected a bush under 
which to shelter from the sun and talked and dozed, and dozed 
and talked throughout the heat of the day. At 2.30 p.m., while 
we were having a picnic lunch, some kalege pheasants started 
chattering agitatedly at the edge of the jungle where the 
buffalo had been killed, and on hearing them our men returned 
from the village. While Ibby and his big-hearted man. Sham 
Singh, went into the jungle where the pheasants were 
chattering— to attract the tiger's attention— I climbed silently 
into the jamun tree. Giving me a few minutes in which to settle 
down, Ibby and Sham Singh came out of the jungle and 
returned to our camp at Chuka, leaving my two men at Thak. 

Shortly after Ibby had gone the pheasants started chattering 
again and a little later a kakar began barking. The tiger was 
evidently on the move, but there was little hope of his crossing 
the open ground and coming to the kill until the sun had set 
and the village had settled down for the night. 

The kakar barked for a quarter of an hour or more before it 
finally stopped, and from then until sunset, except for the 
natural calls of a multitude of birds, the jungle— as far as the 
tiger was concerned— was silent. 

The red glow from the setting sun had faded from the Nepal 
hills on the far side of the Sarda river, and the village sounds 
had died down, when a kakar barked in the direction of the 
buffalo wallow; the tiger was returning to his kill along the line 
he had taken when leaving it. A convenient branch in front of 
me gave a perfect rest for my rifle, and the only movement it 
would be necessary to make when the tiger arrived would be to 
lower my head on to the rifle butt. Minute succeeded minute 



until a hundred had been added to my age and then, two 
hundred yards up the hillside, a kakar barked in alarm and my 
hope of getting a shot, which I had put at ten to one, dropped 
to one in a thousand. It was now quite evident that the tiger 
had seen my man breaking the twigs off the tree, and that 
between sunset and the barking of this last kakar he had 
stalked the tree and seeing me on it had gone away From then 
on kakar and sambhar called at intervals, each call a little 
farther away than the last. At midnight these alarm calls 
ceased altogether, and the jungle settled down to that nightly 
period of rest ordained by Nature, when strife ceases and the 
jungle folk can sleep in peace. Others who have spent nights in 
an Indian jungle will have noticed this period of rest, which 
varies a little according to the season of the year and the 
phases of the moon, and which as a rule extends from midnight 
to 4 a.m. Between these hours killers sleep. And those who go 
in fear of them are at peace. It may be natural for carnivores to 
sleep from midnight to 4 a.m., but I would prefer to think that 
Nature had set apart these few hours so that those who go in 
fear of their lives can relax and be at peace. 

Day was a few minutes old when, cramped in every joint, I 
descended from the tree and, unearthing the thermos flask 
Ibby had very thoughtfully buried under a bush, indulged in a 
much needed cup of tea. Shortly after my two men arrived and 
while we were covering the kill with branches, to protect it 
from vultures, the tiger called three times on a hill half a mile 
away. As I passed through Thak on my way back to camp the 
greybeards of the village met me and begged me not to be 
discouraged by my night's failure, for, they said, they had 
consulted the stars and offered prayers and if the tiger did not 
die this day it would certainly die on the next or, may be, the 
day after. 

A hot bath and a square meal refreshed me and at 1 p.m. I 
again climbed the steep hill to Thak and was told on my arrival 
that a sambhar had belled several times on the hill above the 
village. I had set out from camp with the intention of sitting up 



over a live buffalo; and, to ensure while doing so that the tiger 
did not feed in one place while I was waiting for him in another, 
I placed several sheets of newspaper near the kill I had sat 
over the previous night. There was a well-used cattle track 
through the jungle in which the villagers said the sambhar had 
called. In a tree on the side of this track I put up a rope seat, 
and to a root on the track I tied the buffalo. I climbed into the 
tree at three o'clock, and an hour later first a kakar and then a 
tiger called on the far side of the valley a thousand yards away 
The buffalo had been provided with a big feed of green grass, 
and throughout the night it kept the bell I had tied round its 
neck ringing, but it failed to attract the tiger. At daylight my 
men came for me and they told me that sambhar and kakar had 
called during the night in the deep ravine in which the boy's 
red cap and torn clothes had been found, and at the lower end 
of which we had tied up a buffalo at the request of the 
villagers. 

When I got back to Chuka I found that Ibby had left camp 
before dawn. News had been received late the previous 
evening that a tiger had killed a bullock eight miles up the 
Ladhya valley. He sat up over the kill all night without seeing 
anything of the tiger, and late the following evening he 
returned to camp. 

4 

Jean and I were having breakfast after my night in the tree 
over the live buffalo, when the men engaged in tying out our 
remaining five buffaloes came in to report that the one they 
had tied up at the lower end of the ravine in which my men had 
heard the sambhar and kakar calling the previous night was 
missing. While we were being given this news MacDonald, 
Divisional Forest Officer, who was moving camp that day from 
Kaladhunga to Chuka, arrived and told us he had seen the pug- 
marks of a tiger at the lower end of a ravine where he 
presumed one of our buffaloes had been tied up. These pug- 
marks, Mac said, were similar to those he had seen at Thak 
when on a previous visit he had tried to shoot the man-eater. 


After breakfast, Jean and Mac went down the river to fish while 
I went off with Sham Singh to try to find out what had become, 
of the missing buffalo. Beyond the broken rope and the tiger's 
pug-marks there was nothing to show that the buffalo had been 
killed. However, on casting round I found where one of the 
buffalos' horns had come in contact with the ground and from 
here on there was a well-defined blood trail. Whether the tiger 
lost his bearings after killing the buffalo or whether he was 
trying to cover up his tracks I do not know, for after taking the 
kill over most difficult ground for several miles he brought it 
back to the ravine two hundred yards from where he had 
started. At this point the ravine narrowed down to a bottle-neck 
some ten feet wide. The tiger was probably lying up with his 
kill on the far side of the narrow neck, and as I intended sitting 
up for him all night I decided to join the anglers and share their 
lunch before sitting up. 

After fortifying the inner man, I returned with Sham Singh and 
three men borrowed from the fishing party, for if I found I he 
kill and sat up over it it would not have been safe for Sham 
Singh to have gone back to camp alone. Walking well ahead of 
the four men I approached the bottle-neck for the second time, 
and as I did so the tiger started growling. The ravine here was 
steep and full of boulders and the tiger was growling from 
behind a dense screen of bushes, about twenty yards straight 
in front of me. An unseen tiger's growl at close range is the 
most terrifying sound in the jungle, and is a very definite 
warning to intruders not to approach any nearer. In that 
restricted space, and with the tiger holding a commanding 
position, it would have been foolish to have gone any farther. 

So, signalling to the men to retire, and giving them a few 
minutes to do so, I started to walk backwards very slowly— the 
only safe method of getting away from any animal with which 
one is anxious not to make contact. As soon as I was well clear 
of the bottle-neck I turned and, whistling to the men to stop, 
rejoined them a hundred yards farther down the ravine. I now 
knew exactly where the tiger was, and felt confident I would be 



able to deal with him; so, on rejoining the men, I told them to 
leave me and return to the fishing party. This, however, they 
were very naturally frightened to do. They believed, as I did, 
that the tiger they had just heard growling was a man-eater 
and they wanted to have the protection of my rifle. To have 
taken them back myself would have lost me two hours, and as 
we were in a sal forest and there was not a climbable tree in 
sight, I had of necessity to keep them with me. 

Climbing the steep left bank we went straight away from the 
ravine for two hundred yards. Here we turned to the left and 
after I had paced out two hundred yards we again turned to the 
left and came back to the ravine a hundred yards above where 
we had heard the tiger growling. The tables were now turned 
and we held the advantage of position. I knew the tiger would 
not go down the ravine, for he had seen human beings in that 
direction, only a few minutes before; nor would he go up the 
ravine, for in order to do so he would have to pass us. The bank 
on our side was thirty feet high and devoid of undergrowth, so 
the only way the tiger could get out of the position we had 
manoeuvred him into would be to go up the opposite hillside. 
For ten minutes we sat on the edge of the ravine scanning 
every foot of ground in front of us. Then, moving back a few 
paces, we went thirty yards to the left and again sat down on 
the edge and, as we did so, the man sitting next to me 
whispered 'sher', and pointed across the ravine. I could see 
nothing, and on asking the man how much of the tiger he could 
see, and to describe its position, he said he had seen its ears 
move and that it was near some dry leaves. A tiger's ears are 
not conspicuous objects at fifty yards, and as the ground was 
carpeted with dead leaves his description did nothing to help 
me locate the tiger. From the breathing of the men behind me 
it was evident that excitement was rising to a high pitch. 
Presently one of the men stood up to get a better view, and the 
tiger, who had been lying down facing us, got up and started to 
go up the hill, and as his head appeared from behind a bush I 
fired. My bullet, I subsequently found, went through the ruff on 



his neck and striking a rock splintered back, making him spring 
straight up into the air, and on landing he got involved with a 
big creeper from which he found some difficulty in freeing 
himself. When we saw him struggling on the ground we 
thought he was down for good, but when he regained his feet 
and galloped off Sham Singh expressed the opinion, which I 
shared, that he was unwounded. Leaving the men I crossed the 
ravine and on examining the ground found the long hairs the 
bullet had clipped, the splintered rock, and the torn and bitten 
creeper, but I found no blood. 

Blood does not always flow immediately after an animal has 
been hit, and my reconstruction of the shot may have been 
faulty; so it was necessary to find the kill, for it would tell me 
on the morrow whether or not the tiger was wounded. Here we 
had some difficulty, and it was not until we had gone over the 
ground twice that we eventually found the kill in a pool of 
water four feet deep, where the tiger had presumably put it to 
preserve it from hornets and blowflies. Sending the three men I 
had borrowed back to the fishing party— it was safe to do so 
now— Sham Singh and I remained hidden near the kill for an 
hour to listen for jungle sounds and then, hearing none, 
returned to camp. After an early breakfast next morning Mac 
and I returned to the ravine and found that the tiger had 
removed the kill from the pool, carried it a short distance, and 
eaten it out leaving only the head and hooves. This, together 
with the absence of blood on the ground on which he had been 
lying while eating, was proof that the tiger was not wounded 
and that he had recovered from his fright. 

When we got back to camp we were informed that a cow had 
been killed in a wide open ravine on the far side of the Ladhya 
river, and that the men who had found it had covered it with 
branches. Ibby had not returned from his visit to the village 
eight miles up the Ladhya, and after lunch Mac and I went out 
to look at the cow. It had been covered up at midday and 
shortly afterwards the tiger had returned, dug it out from 
under the branches, and carried it away without leaving any 



mark of a drag. The forest here consisted of great big sal trees 
without any undergrowth, and it took us an hour to find the kill 
where the liger had hidden it under a great pile of dead leaves. 
In a nearby tree Mac very gallantly put up a machan for me 
while I smoked and emptied his water-bottle— the shade 
temperature was about a hundred and ten degrees— and after 
seeing me into the tree he returned to camp. An hour later a 
small stone rolling down the steep hill on the far side of the 
ravine attracted my attention, and shortly after a tigress came 
into view, followed by two small cubs. This was quite evidently 
the first occasion on which the cubs had ever been taken to a 
kill, and it was very interesting to see the pains the mother 
took to impress on them the danger of the proceeding and the 
great caution it was necessary to exercise. The behaviour of the 
cubs was as interesting as their mother's. Step by step they 
followed in her tracks; never trying to pass each other, or her; 
avoiding every obstruction that she avoided no matter how 
small it was, and remaining perfectly rigid when she stopped to 
listen, which she did every few yards. The ground was carpeted 
with big sal leaves as dry as tinder over which it was 
impossible to move silently; however, every pad was put down 
carefully and as carefully lifted, and as little sound as possible 
was made. 

Crossing the ravine, the tigress, closely followed by the cubs, 
came towards me and passing behind my tree lay down on a 
flat piece of ground overlooking the kill, and about thirty yards 
from it. Her lying down was apparently intended as a signal to 
the cubs to go forward in the direction in which her nose was 
pointing, and this they proceeded to do. By what means the 
mother conveyed the information to her cubs that there was 
food for them at this spot I do not know, but that she had 
conveyed this information to them there was no question. 
Passing their mother— after she had lain down— and 
exercising the same caution they had been made to exercise 
when following her, they set out with every appearance of 
being on a very definite quest. I have repeatedly asserted that 



tigers have no sense of smell, and the cubs were providing me 
with ample proof of that assertion. Though the kill had only 
been reported to us that morning the cow had actually been 
killed the previous day and before hiding it under the pile of 
dead leaves the tigress had eaten the greater portion of it. The 
weather, as I have said, was intensely hot, and it was the smell 
that eventually enabled Mac and me to find the kill. And here, 
now, were two hungry cubs ranging up and down, back and 
forth, passing and repassing a dozen times within a yard of the 
kill and yet not being able to find it. It was the blowflies that 
disclosed its position and at length enabled them to find it. 
Dragging it out from under the leaves the cubs sat down 
together to have their meal. The tigress had watched her cubs 
as intently as I had and only once, when they were questing too 
far afield, had she spoken to them. As soon as the kill had been 
found the mother turned on to her hack with her legs in the air 
and went to sleep. 

As I watched the cubs feeding I was reminded of a scene I had 
witnessed some years previously at the foot of Trisul. I was 
lying on a ridge scanning with field glasses a rock cliff opposite 
me for thar, the most sure-footed of all Himalayan goats. On a 
ledge halfway up the cliff a thar and her kid were lying asleep. 
Presently the thar got to her feet, stretched herself, and the kid 
immediately started to nuzzle her and feed. After a minute or 
so the mother freed herself, took a few steps along the ledge, 
poised for a moment, and then jumped down on to another and 
a narrower ledge some twelve to fifteen feet below her. As soon 
as it was left alone the kid started running backwards and 
forwards, stopping every now and then to peer down at its 
mother, but unable to summon the courage to jump down to 
her for, below the few-inches-wide ledge, was a sheer drop of a 
thousand feet. I was too far away to hear whether the mother 
was encouraging her young, but from the way her head was 
turned I believe she was doing so. The kid was now getting 
more and more agitated and, possibly fearing that it would do 
something foolish, the mother went to what looked like a mere 



crack in the vertical rock face and, climbing it, rejoined her 
young. Immediately on doing so she lay down, presumably to 
prevent the kid from feeding. After a little while she again got 
to her feet, allowed the kid to drink for a minute, poised 
carefully on the brink, and jumped down, while the kid again 
ran backwards and forwards above her. Seven times in the 
course of the next half-hour this procedure was gone through, 
until finally the kid, abandoning itself to its fate, jumped, and 
landing safely beside its mother was rewarded by being 
allowed to drink its fill. The lesson, to teach her young that it 
was safe to follow where she led, was over for that day. Instinct 
helps, but it is the infinite patience of the mother and the 
unquestioning obedience of her offspring that enable the young 
of all animals in the wild to grow to maturity. I regret I lacked 
the means, when I had the opportunity, of making 
cinematographic records of the different species of animals I 
have watched training their young, for there is nothing more 
interesting to be seen in a jungle. 

When the cubs finished their meal they returned to their 
mother and she proceeded to clean them, rolling them over and 
licking off the blood they had acquired while feeding. When 
this job was finished to her entire satisfaction she set off, with 
the cubs following close behind, in the direction of a shallow 
ford in the Ladhya, for nothing remained of the kill and there 
was no suitable cover for her cubs on this side of the river. 

I did not know, and it would have made no difference if I had, 
that the tigress I watched with such interest that day would 
later, owing to gunshot wounds, become a man-eater and a 
terror to all who lived or worked in the Ladhva valley and the 
surrounding villages. 

The kill at Thak, over which I had sat the first night, had been 
uncovered to let the vultures eat it, and another buffalo had 
been tied up at the head of the valley to the west of the village 
and about two hundred yards from the old kill. Four mornings 


later the headman of Thak sent word to us that this buffalo had 
been killed by a tiger and carried away. 

Our preparations were soon made, and after a terribly hot 
climb Ibby and I reached the scene of the kill at about midday 
The tiger, after killing the buffalo and breaking a very strong 
rope, had picked up the kill and gone straight down into the 
valley Telling the two men we had brought to carry our lunch 
to keep close behind us, we set off to follow the drag. It soon 
became apparent that the tiger was making for some definite 
spot, for he led us for two miles through dense undergrowth, 
down steep banks, through beds of nettles and raspberry 
bushes, over and under fallen trees, and over great masses of 
rock until finally he deposited the kill in a small hollow under a 
box tree shaped like an umbrella. The buffalo had been killed 
the previous night and the fact that the tiger had left it without 
having a meal was disquieting. However, this was to a great 
extent offset by the pains he had taken in getting the kill to this 
spot, and if all went well there was every reason to hope that 
he would return to his kill, for, from the teeth-marks on the 
buffalo's neck, we knew he was the man-eater we were looking 
for and not just an ordinary tiger. 

Our hot walk up to Thak and subsequent descent down the 
densely wooded hillside, over difficult ground, had left us in a 
bath of sweat, and while we rested in the hollow having lunch 
and drinking quantities of tea, I cast my eyes round for a 
convenient tree on which to sit and, if necessary in which to 
pass the night. Growing on the outer edge of the hollow and 
leaning away from the hill at an angle of forty-five degrees was 
a ficustree. This, starting life in some decayed part of a giant of 
the forest, had killed the parent tree by weaving a trellis round 
it, and this trellis was now in course of coalescing to form a 
trunk for the parasite. Ten feet from the ground, and where the 
trellis had stopped and the parent tree had rotted and fallen 
away, there appeared to be a comfortable seat on which I 
decided to sit. 



Lunch eaten and a cigarette smoked, Ibby took our two men 
sixty yards to the right and sent them up a tree to shake the 
branches and pretend they were putting up a machan, to 
distract the tiger's attention in case he was lying up close by 
and watching us, while I as silently as possible climbed into the 
ficus tree. The seat I had selected sloped forward and was 
cushioned with rotten wood and dead leaves and, fearing that if 
I brushed them off the sound and movement might be detected 
by the tiger, I left them as they were and sat down on them, 
hoping devoutly that there were no snakes in the hollow trunk 
below me or scorpions in the dead leaves. Placing my feet in an 
opening in the trellis, to keep from slipping forward, I made 
myself as comfortable as conditions permitted, and when I had 
done so Ibby called the men off the tree and went away talking 
to them in a loud voice. 

The tree in which I had elected to sit was, as I have already 
said, leaning outwards at an angle of forty-five degrees, and 
ten feet immediately below me there was a flat bit of ground 
about ten feet wide and twenty feet long. From this flat piece of 
ground the hill fell steeply away and was overgrown with tall 
grass and dense patches of brushwood, beyond which I could 
hear a stream running; an ideal place for a tiger to lie up in. 

Ibby and the two men had been gone about fifteen minutes 
when a red monkey on the far side of the valley started barking 
to warn the jungle folk of the presence of a tiger. From the fact 
that this monkey had not called when we were coming down 
the hill, following the drag, it was evident that the tiger had not 
moved off at our approach and that he was now coming to 
investigate— as tigers do— the sounds he had heard in the 
vicinity of his kill. Monkeys are blessed with exceptionally good 
eyesight, and though the one that was calling was a quarter of 
a mile away, it was quite possible that the tiger he was calling 
at was close to me. 

I was sitting facing the hill with the kill to my left front, and the 
monkey had only called eight times when I heard a dry stick 



snap down the steep hillside behind me. Turning my head to 
the right and looking through the trellis, which on this side 
extended a little above my head, I saw the tiger standing and 
looking in the direction of my tree, from a distance of about 
forty yards. For several minutes he stood looking alternately in 
my direction and then in the direction of the tree the two men 
had climbed, until eventually, deciding to come in my direction, 
he started up the steep hillside. It would not have been possible 
for a human being to have got over that steep and difficult 
ground without using his hands and without making 
considerable noise, but the tiger accomplished the feat without 
making a sound. The nearer he came to the flat ground the 
more cautious he became and the closer he kept his belly to the 
ground. When he was near the top of the bank he very slowly 
raised his head, took a long look at the tree the men had 
climbed, and satisfied that it was not tenanted sprang up on to 
the flat ground and passed out of sight under me. I expected 
him to reappear on my left and go towards the kill, and while I 
was waiting for him to do so I heard the dry leaves under the 
tree being crushed as he lay down on them. 

For the next quarter of an hour I sat perfectly still, and as no 
further sounds came to me from the tiger I turned my head to 
the right, and craning my neck looked through an opening in 
the trellis, and saw the tiger's head. If I had been able to 
squeeze a tear out of my eye and direct it through the opening 
it would, believe, have landed plumb on his nose. His chin was 
resting on the ground and his eyes were closed. Presently he 
opened them and blinked a few times to drive away the flies, 
then closed them again and went to sleep. Regaining my 
position I now turned my head to the left. On this side there 
was no trellis nor were there any branches against which I 
could brace myself, and when I had craned my neck as far as I 
could without losing my balance I looked down and found I 
could see most of the tiger's tail, and a part of one hind leg. 

The situation needed consideration. The bole of the tree 
against which I had my back was roughly three feet thick and 



afforded ideal cover, so there was no possibility of the tiger 
seeing me. That he would go to the kill if not disturbed was 
certain; the question was, when would he go? It was a hot 
afternoon, but the spot he had selected to lie on was in deep 
shade from my tree and, further, there was a cool breeze 
blowing up the valley In these pleasant conditions he might 
sleep for hours and not approach the kill until day light had 
gone, taking with it my chance of getting a shot. The risk of 
waiting on the tiger's pleasure could not be taken, therefore, 
for apart from the reason given the time at our disposal was 
nearly up and this might be the last chance I would get of 
killing the tiger, while on that chance might depend the lives of 
many people. Waiting for a shot being inadvisable, then, there 
remained the possibility of dealing with the tiger where he lay. 
There were several openings in the trellis on my right through 
which I could have inserted the barrel of my rifle, but having 
done this it would not have been possible to depress the muzzle 
of the rifle sufficiently to get the sights to bear on the tiger's 
head. To have stood up, climbed the trellis, and fired over the 
top of it would not have been difficult. But this could not have 
been done without making a certain amount of noise, for the 
dry leaves I was sitting on would have crackled when relieved 
of my weight, and within ten feet of me was an animal with the 
keenest hearing of any in the jungle. A shot at the head end of 
the tiger not being feasible, there remained the tail end. 

When I had both my hands on the rifle and craned my neck to 
the left, I had been able to see most of the tiger's tail and a 
portion of one hind leg. By releasing my right hand from the 
rifle and getting a grip of the trellis I found I could lean out far 
enough to see one-third of the tiger. If I could maintain this 
position after releasing my hold, it would be possible to disable 
him. The thought of disabling an animal, and a sleeping one at 
that, simply because he occasionally liked a change of diet was 
hateful. Sentiment, however, where a man-eater was concerned 
was out of place. I had been trying for days to shoot this tiger 
to save further loss of human life, and now that I had a chance 



of doing so the fact that I would have to break his back before 
killing him would not justify my throwing away that chance. So 
the killing would have to be done no matter how unpleasant the 
method might be, and the sooner it was done the better, for in 
bringing his kill to this spot the tiger had laid a two-mile-long 
scent trail, and a hungry bear finding that trail might at any 
moment take the decision out of my hands. Keeping my body 
perfectly rigid I gradually released my hold of the trellis, got 
both hands on the rifle, and fired a shot behind and under me 
which I have no desire ever to repeat. When I pressed the 
trigger of the 450/400 high-velocity rifle, the butt was pointing 
to heaven and I was looking under, not over, the sights. The 
recoil injured but did not break either my fingers or my wrist, 
as I had feared it would, and as the tiger threw the upper part 
of his body round and started to slide down the hill on his back, 
I swung round on my seat and fired the second barrel into his 
chest. I should have felt less a murderer if, at my first shot, the 
tiger had stormed and raved but— being the big-hearted 
animal that he was— he never opened his mouth, and died at 
my second shot without having made a sound. 

Ibby had left me with the intention of sitting up in 
the jamun tree over the buffalo which had been killed four days 
previously and which the vultures had, for some unknown 
reason, not eaten. He thought that if the tiger had seen me 
climbing into the ficus tree it might abandon the kill over which 
I was sitting and go back to its old kill at Thak and give him a 
shot. On hearing my two shots he came hurrying back to see if 
I needed his help, and I met him half a mile from the ficus tree. 
Together we returned to the scene of the killing to examine the 
tiger. He was a fine big male in the prime of life and in perfect 
condition, and would have measured— if we had had anything 
to measure him with— nine feet six inches between pegs, or 
nine feet ten over curves. And the right canine tooth in his 
lower jaw was broken. Later I found several pellets of buckshot 
embedded in different parts of his body. 

The tiger was too heavy for the four of us to carry back to camp 



so we left him where he lay, after covering him up with grass, 
branches, and deadwood heaped over with big stones, to 
protect him from bears. Word travelled round that night that 
the man-eating tiger was dead and when we carried him to the 
loot of the ficus tree next morning to skin him, more than a 
hundred men and boys crowded round to see him. Among the 
latter was the ten-year-old brother of the Chuka man-eater's 
last human victim. 



he Talla Des Man-Eater 


1 

NOWHERE ALONG THE FOOTHILLS of the Himalayas is there 
a more beautiful setting for a camp than under the Flame of 
the Forest trees at Bindukhera, when they are in full bloom. If 
you can picture white tents under a canopy of orange-coloured 
bloom; a multitude of brilliantly plumaged red and gold 
minivets, golden orioles, rose-headed parakeets, golden backed 
woodpeckers, and wire-crested drongos flitting from tree to 
tree and shaking down the bloom until the ground round the 
tents resembled a rich orange-coloured carpet; densely wooded 
foothills in the background topped by ridge upon rising ridge of 
the Himalayas, and they in turn topped by the eternal snows, 
then, and only then, will you have some idea of our camp at 
Bindukhera one February morning in the year 1929. 

Bindukhera, which is only a name for the camping ground, is 
on the western edge of a wide expanse of grassland some 
twelve miles long and ten miles wide. When Sir Henry Ramsay 
was king of Kumaon the plain was under intensive cultivation, 
but at the time of my story there were only three small villages, 
each with a few acres of cultivation dotted along the banks of 
the sluggish stream that meanders down the length of the 
plain. The grass on the plain had been burnt a few weeks 
before our arrival, leaving islands of varying sizes where the 
ground was damp and the grass too green to burn. It was on 
these islands that we hoped to find the game that had brought 
us to Bindukhera for a week's shooting. I had shot over this 
ground for ten years and knew every foot of it, so the running 
of the shoot was left to me. 

Shooting from the back of a well-trained elephant on the 
grasslands of the Tarai is one of the most pleasant forms of 
sport I know of. No matter how long the day may be, every 
moment of it is packed with excitement and interest, for in 
addition to the variety of game to be shot— on a good day I 
have seen eighteen varieties brought to bag ranging from quail 



and snipe to leopard and swamp deer— there is a great wealth 
of bird life to ordinarily be seen when walking through grass on 
foot. 

There were nine guns and five spectators in camp on the first 
day of our shoot that February morning, and after an early 
breakfast we mounted our elephants and formed a line, with a 
pad elephant between every two guns. Taking my position in 
the centre of the line, with four guns and four pad elephants on 
either side of me, we set off due south with the flanking gun on 
the right— fifty yards in advance of the line— to cut off birds 
that rose out of range of the other guns and were making for 
the forest on the right. If you are ever given choice of position 
in a line of elephants on a mixed-game shoot select a flank, but 
only if you are good with both gun and rifle. Game put up by a 
line of elephants invariably try to break out at a flank, and one 
of the most difficult objects to hit is a bird or an animal that has 
been missed by others. 

When the air is crisp and laden with all the sweet scents that 
are to be smelt in an Indian jungle in the early morning, it goes 
to the head like champagne, and has the same effect on birds, 
with the result that both gunsand birds tend to be too quick off 
the mark. A too eager gun and a wild bird do not produce a 
heavy bag, and the first few minutes of all glorious days are 
usually as unproductive as the last few minutes when muscles 
are tired and eyes strained. Birds were plentiful that morning, 
and, after the guns had settled down, shooting improved and in 
our first beat along the edge of the forest we picked up five 
peafowl, three red jungle fowl, ten black partridges, four grey 
partridges, two bush quails, and three hares. A 
good sambhar had been put up but he gained the shelter of the 
forest before rifles could be got to bear on him. 

Where a tongue of forest extended out on to the plain for a few 
hundred yards, I halted the line. This forest was famous for the 
number of peafowl and jungle fowl that were always to be 
found in it, but as the ground was cut up by a number of deep 



nullahs that made it difficult to maintain a straight line, I 
decided not to take the elephants through it, for one of the 
guns was inexperienced and was shooting from the back of an 
elephant that morning for the first time. It was in this forest— 
when Wyndham and I some years previously were looking for a 
tiger— that I saw for the first time a cardinal bat. These 
beautiful bats, which look like gorgeous butterflies as they flit 
from cover to cover, are, as far as I know, only to be found in 
heavy elephant-grass. 

After halting the line I made the elephants turn their heads to 
the east and move off in single file. When the last elephant had 
cleared the ground over which we had just beaten, I again 
halted them and made them turn their heads to the north. We 
were now facing the Himalayas, and hanging in the sky directly 
in front of us was a brilliantly lit white cloud that looked solid 
enough for angels to dance on. 

The length of a line of seventeen elephants depends on the 
ground that is being beaten. Where the grass was heavy I 
shortened the line to a hundred yards, and where it was light I 
extended it to twice that length. We had beaten up to the north 
for a mile or so, collecting thirty more birds and a leopard, 
when a ground owl got up in front of the line. Several guns 
were raised and lowered when it was realized what the bird 
was. These ground owls, which live in abandoned pangolin and 
porcupine burrows, are about twice the size of a partridge, look 
white on the wing, and have longer legs than the ordinary run 
of owls. When flushed by a line of elephants they fly low for 
fifty to a hundred yards before alighting. This I believe they do 
to allow the line to clear their burrows, for when flushed a 
second time they invariably fly over the line and back to the 
spot from where they originally rose. The owl we flushed that 
morning, however, did not behave as these birds usually do, for 
after flying fifty to sixty yards in a straight line it suddenly 
started to gain height by going round and round in short 
circles. The reason for this was apparent a moment later when 
a peregrine falcon, flying at great speed, came out of the forest 



on the left. Unable to regain the shelter of its burrow the owl 
was now making a desperate effort to keep above the falcon. 
With rapid wing beats he was spiralling upwards, while the 
falcon on widespread wings was circling up and up to get 
above his quarry All eyes, including those of themahouts, were 
now on the exciting flight, so I halted the line. 

It is difficult to judge heights when there is nothing to make a 
comparison with. At a rough guess the two birds had reached a 
height of a thousand feet, when the owl— still moving in circles 
— started to edge away towards the big white cloud, and one 
could imagine the angels suspending their dance and urging it 
to make one last effort to reach the shelter of their cloud. The 
falcon was not slow to see the object of this manoeuvre, and he 
too was now beating the air with his wings and spiralling up in 
ever-shortening circles. Would the owl make it or would he 
now, as the falcon approached nearer to him, lose his nerve and 
plummet down in a vain effort to reach mother earth and the 
sanctuary of his burrow? Field glasses were now out for those 
who needed them, and up and down the line excited 
exclamations— in two languages— were running. 

'Oh! he can't make it.' 

'Yes he can, he can.' 

'Only a little way to go now.' 

'But look, look, the falcon is gaining on him.' And then, 
suddenly, only one bird was to be seen against the cloud. 'Well 
done! well done! Shahbashl shahbash!' The owl had made it, 
and while hats were being waved and hands were being 
clapped, the falcon in a long graceful glide came back to 
the semul tree from which he had started. 

The reactions of human beings to any particular event are 
unpredictable. Fifty-four birds and four animals had been shot 
that morning— and many more missed— without a qualm or 
the batting of an eyelid. And now, guns, spectators, 
and mahouts were unreservedly rejoicing that a ground owl 



had escaped the talons of a peregrine falcon. 

At the northern end of the plain I again turned the line of 
elephants south, and beat down along the right bank of the 
stream that provided irrigation water for the three villages. 
Here on the damp ground the grass was unburnt and heavy, 
and rifles were got ready, for there were many hog deer and 
swamp deer in this area, and there was also a possibility of 
putting up another leopard. 

We had gone along the bank of the stream for about a mile, 
picking up five more peafowl, four cock florican— hens were 
barred— three snipe, and a hog deer with very good horns 
when the accidental (please turn your eyes away. Recording 
Angel) discharge of a heavy high-velocity rifle in the hands of a 
spectator sitting behind me in my howdah, scorched the inner 
lining of my left ear and burst the eardrum. For me the rest of 
that February day was torture. After a sleepless night I excused 
myself on the plea that I had urgent work to attend to (again, 
please. Recording Angel) and at dawn, while the camp was 
asleep, I set out on a twenty-five-mile walk to my home at 
Kaladhungi. 

The doctor at Kaladhungi, a keen young man who had recently 
completed his medical training, confirmed my fears that my 
eardrum had been destroyed. A month later we moved up to 
our summer home at Naini Tal, and at the Ramsay 
Hospital (now Govind Ballabh Pant Hospital) I received further 
confirmation of this diagnosis from Colonel Barber, Civil 
Surgeon of Naini Tal. Days passed, and it became apparent that 
abscesses were forming in my head. My condition was 
distressing my two sisters as much as it was distressing me, 
and as the hospital was unable to do anything to relieve me I 
decided— much against the wishes of my sisters and the advice 
of Colonel Barber— to go away. 

I have mentioned this 'accident 7 not with the object of enlisting 
sympathy but because it has a very important bearing on the 
story of the Talla Des man-eater which I shall now relate. 



2 

Bill Baynes and Ham Vivian were Deputy Commissioners of, 
respectively Almora and Naini Tal in the year 1929, and both 
were suffering from man-eaters, the former from the Talla Des 
man-eating tiger, and the latter from the Chowgarh man-eating 
tiger. 

I had promised Vivian that I would try to shoot his tiger first, 
but as it had been less active during the winter months than 
Baynes's, I decided, with Vivian's approval, to try for the other 
first. The pursuit of this tiger would, I hoped, tide me over my 
bad time and enable me to adjust myself to my new condition. 
So to Talla Des I went. 

My story concerns the Talla Des tiger, and I have refrained 
from telling it until I had written Jungle Lore. For without first 
reading Jungle Lore, and knowing that I had learnt— when a 
boy and later— how to walk in a jungle and use a rifle, and the 
credulity of all who were not present in Kumaon at that time 
would have been strained and this, after my previous stories 
had been accepted at their face value, was the last thing I 
desired. 

My preparations were soon made and on 4 April I left Naini Tal 
accompanied by six Garhwalis, among whom were Madho 
Singh and Ram Singh, a cook named Elahai, and a Brahmin, 
Ganga Ram, who did odd jobs and was very keen to go with me. 
Walking the fourteen miles down to Kathgodam we caught the 
evening train and, travelling through Bareilly and Pilibhit, 
arrived at noon next day at Tanakpur. Here I was met by 
thepeshkar, who informed me that a boy had been killed the 
previous day by the Talla Des man-eater, and that under 
Baynes's orders two young buffaloes— to be used as bait— had 
been dispatched for me via Champawat to Talla Des. After my 
men had cooked and eaten their food and I had breakfasted at 
the dak bungalow, we started off in good heart to try to walk 
the twenty-four miles to Kaladhunga (not to be confused with 
Kaladhungi) the same night. 


The first twelve miles of the road— through Baramdeo to the 
foot of the sacred Purnagiri mountain— runs through forest 
most of the way. At the foot of the mountain the road ends, and 
there is the choice of two tracks to Kaladhunga. One, the 
longer, goes steeply up the left-hand side of the mountain to 
the Purnagiri temples, over a shoulder of the mountain, and 
down to Kaladhunga. The other track follows the alignment of 
the tramway line made by Collier when extracting the million 
cubic feet of sal timber that I have already spoken of. Collier's 
tramline— where it ran for four miles through the Sarda river 
gorge— has long since been washed away, but portions of the 
track he blasted across the perpendicular rock lace of the 
mountain still remain. The going over this portion of the track 
was very difficult for my heavily laden Garhwalis, and night 
came on when we were only halfway through the gorge. 

Finding a suitable place on which to camp for the night was not 
easy, but after rejecting several places made dangerous by 
falling stones we eventually found a narrow shelf where the 
overhanging rock offered measure of safety. Here we decided 
to spend the night, and after I had eaten my dinner and while 
the men were cooking their food with driftwood brought up 
from the river I undressed and lay down on my camp bed, the 
only article of camp equipment, excluding a washbasin and a 
forty-pound tent, that I had brought with me. 

The day had been hot and we had covered some sixteen miles 
since detraining at Tanakpur. I was comfortably tired and was 
enjoying an after-dinner cigarette, when on the hill on the far 
side of the river I suddenly saw three lights appear. The forests 
in Nepal are burnt annually, the burning starting in April. Now, 
on seeing the lights, I concluded that the wind blowing down 
the gorge had fanned to flame the smouldering embers in some 
dead wood. As I idly watched these fires two more appeared a 
little above them. Presently the left-hand one of these two new 
fires moved slowly down the hill and merged into the central 
one of the original three. I now realized that what I had 
assumed were fires, were not fires but lights, all of a uniform 



size of about two feet in diameter, burning steadily without a 
flicker or trace of smoke. When presently more lights 
appeared, some to the left and others farther up the hill, an 
explanation to account for them presented itself. A potentate 
out on shikar had evidently lost some article he valued and had 
sent men armed with lanterns to search for it. Admittedly a 
strange explanation, but many strange things happen on the far 
side of that snow-fed river. 

My men were as interested in the lights as I was, and as the 
river below us flowed without a ripple and the night was still, I 
asked them if they could hear voices or any other sounds— the 
distance across was about a hundred and fifty yards— but they 
said they could hear nothing. Speculation as to what was 
happening on the opposite hill was profitless, and as we were 
tired out after our strenuous day the camp was soon wrapped 
in slumber. Once during the night a ghooral sneezed in alarm 
on the cliff above us, and a little later a leopard called. 

A long march and a difficult climb lay before us. I had warned 
my men that we would make an early start, and light was just 
showing in the east when I was given a cup of hot tea. Breaking 
camp, when only a few pots and pans had to be put away and a 
camp bed dismantled, was soon accomplished. As the cook and 
my Garhwalis streamed off in single file down a goat track into 
a deep ravine, which in Collier's clay had been spanned by an 
iron bridge, I turned my eyes to the hill on which we had seen 
the lights. The sun was not far from rising, and distant objects 
were now clearly visible. From crest to water's edge and from 
water's edge to crest I scanned every foot of the hill, first with 
my naked eyes and then with field glasses. Not a sign of any 
human being could I see, or, reverting to my first theory, was 
there any smouldering wood, and it only needed a glance to see 
that the vegetation in this area had not been burnt for a year. 
The hill was rock from top to bottom, a few stunted trees and 
bushes growing where roothold had been found in crack or 
cranny. Where the lights had appeared was a perpendicular 
rock where no human being, unless suspended from above. 



could possibly have gone. 

Nine days later, my mission to the hill people accomplished, I 
camped for a night at Kaladhunga. For a lover of nature, or for 
a keen fisherman, there are few places in Kumaon to compare 
with Kaladhunga. From the bungalow Collier built when 
extracting the timber Nepal gave India, the land slopes gently 
down in a series of benches to the Sarda river. On these 
benches, where crops grew in the bygone days, there is now a 
luxuriant growth of grass. Here sambhar and cheetal are to be 
seen feeding morning and evening, and in the beautiful forests 
behind the bungalow live leopards and tigers, and a wealth of 
bird life including peafowl, jungle fowl, and kalege pheasants. 

In the big pools and runs below the bungalow some of the best 
fishing in the Sarda river is to be had, either on a spinning rod 
with plug bait or on a light rod with salmon fly or fly spoon. 

At crack of dawn next morning we left Kaladhunga, Ganga Ram 
taking the mountain track to Purnagiri and the rest of us the 
shorter way through the Sarda gorge. Ganga Ram's mission— 
which would entail an additional ten-miles walk— was to 
present our thank-offerings to the sacred Purnagiri shrine. 
Before he left me I instructed him to find out all he could, from 
the priests who served the shrine, about the lights we had seen 
when on our way up to Talla Des. When he rejoined me that 
evening at Tanakpur he gave me the following information, 
which he had gleaned from the priests and from his own 
observations. 

Purnagiri, dedicated to the worship of the Goddess Bhagbatti 
and visited each year by tens of thousands of pilgrims, is 
accessible by two tracks. These, one from Baramdeo and the 
other from Kaladhunga, meet on the northern face of the 
mountain a short distance below the crest. At the junction of 
the tracks is situated the less sacred of the two Purnagiri 
shrines. The more sacred shrine is higher up and to the left. 
This holy of holies can only be reached by going along a narrow 
crack, or fault, running across the face of a more or less 



perpendicular rock cliff. Nervous people, children, and the 
aged are carried across the cliff in a basket slung on the back 
of a hillman. Only those whom the Goddess favours are able to 
reach the upper shrine; the others are struck blind and have to 
make their offerings at the lower shrine. 

Puja (prayer) at the upper shrine starts at sunrise and ends at 
midday. After this hour no one is permitted to pass the lower 
shrine. Near the upper and more sacred shrine is a pinnacle of 
rock a hundred feet high, the climbing of which is forbidden by 
the Goddess. In the days of long ago a sadhu, more ambitious 
than his fellows, climbed the pinnacle with the object of putting 
himself on an equality with the Goddess. Incensed at his 
disregard of her orders, the Goddess hurled the sadhu from the 
pinnacle to the hill on the far side of the snow-fed river. It is 
this sadhu who, banished for ever from Purnagiri, worships the 
Goddess two thousand feet above him by lighting lamps to her. 
These votive lights only appear at certain times (we saw them 
on 5 April) and are only visible to favoured people. This favour 
was accorded to me and to the men with me, because I was on 
a mission to the hillfolk over whom the Goddess watches. 

That in brief was the information regarding the light which 
Ganga Ram brought back from Purnagiri and imparted to me 
while we were waiting for our train at Tanakpur. Some weeks 
later I received a visit from the Rawal (High Priest) of 
Purnagiri. He had come to see me about an article I had 
published in a local paper on the subject of the Purnagiri lights, 
and to congratulate me on being the only European ever to 
have been privileged to see them. In my article I gave the 
explanation for the lights as I have given it in these pages, and 
I added that if my readers were unable to accept this 
explanation and desired to find one for themselves, they should 
bear the following points in mind: 

The lights did not appear simultaneously. 

They were of a uniform size (about two feet in diameter). 



They were not affected by wind. 

They were able to move from one spot to another. 

The High Priest was emphatic that the lights were an 
established fact which no one could dispute— in this I was in 
agreement with him for I had seen them for myself— and that 
no other explanation than the one I had given could be 
advanced to account for them. 

The following year I was fishing the Sarda with Sir Malcolm 
(now Lord) Hailey who was Governor of the United Provinces 
at the time. Sir Malcolm had seen my article and as we 
approached the gorge he asked me to point out the spot where 
I had seen the lights. We had four dhimas (fishermen) with us 
who were piloting the sarnis (inflated skins) on which we were 
floating down the river from one fishing stand to the next. 

These men were part of a gang of twenty engaged by a 
contractor in floating pine sleepers from the high-level forests 
in Kumaon and Nepal to the boom at Baramdeo. This was a 
long, difficult, and very dangerous task, calling for great 
courage and a thorough knowledge of the river and its many 
hazards. 

Below the shelf blasted out of the cliff by Collier, on which my 
men and I had spent the night when on our way up to Talla Des, 
was a narrow sandy beach. Here the dhimas at my request 
brought the sarnis to the bank, and we went ashore. After I had 
pointed out where the lights had appeared, and traced their 
movements on the hill. Sir Malcolm said the dhimas could 
possibly provide an explanation, or at least throw some light on 
the subject. So he turned to them— he knew the correct 
approach to make to an Indian when seeking information and 
could speak the language perfectly— and elicited the following 
information. Their homes were in the Kangra Valley where they 
had some cultivation, but not sufficient to support them. They 
earned their living by floating sleepers down the Sarda river 
for Thakur Dan Singh Bist. They knew every foot of the river as 
far down as Baramdeo, for they had been up and down it 



countless times. They knew this particular gorge very well, for 
there were backwaters in it that hung up the sleepers and gave 
them a great deal of trouble. They had never seen anything 
unusual in this part of the river in the way of lights, or anything 
else. 

As he turned away from the dhimas I asked Sir Malcolm to put 
one more question to them. Had they in all the years they had 
been working on the Sarda ever spent a night in the gorge? 
Their answer to this question was a very emphatic No! 
Questioned further they said that not only had they never spent 
a night in the gorge but that they had never heard of anyone 
else ever having done so. The reason they gave for this was 
that the gorge was haunted by evil spirits. 

Two thousand feet above us a narrow crack, worn smooth by 
the naked feet of generations upon generations of devotees, 
ran for fifty yards across a perpendicular rock cliff where there 
was no handhold of any kind. In spite of the precautions taken 
by the priests to safeguard the lives of pilgrims, casualties 
while negotiating that crack were heavy until H. H. The 
Maharaja of Mysore provided funds a few years ago for a steel 
cable to be stretched across the face of the cliff, from the lower 
shrine to the upper. 

So there well might be spirits at the foot of that cliff but not, I 
think, evil ones. 

3 

Now to get back to my story. 

Ganga Ram, who could cover the ground as fast as any man in 
Kumaon, had stayed back with me to carry my camera, and we 
caught up with the cook and the six Garhwalis two miles from 
where we had spent the night. For the next six hours we 
walked with never a pause, at times through dense forests and 
at times along the bank of the Sarda river. Our way took us 
through Kaladhunga and through Chuka to the foot of the 
mountain, on the far side of which was our objective, the 


hunting grounds of the Talla Des man-eater. At the foot of the 
mountain we halted for two hours— to cook and eat our midday 
meal— before essaying the four-thousand-foot climb. 

In the afternoon, with the hot April sun blazing down on our 
backs and without a single tree to shade us, we started on one 
of the steepest and most exhausting climbs my men and I had 
ever undertaken. The so-called road was only a rough track 
which went straight up the face of the mountain without a 
single hairpin bend to ease the gradient. After repeated and 
many halts we arrived at sunset at a little hamlet, a thousand 
feet from the crest. We had been warned at Chuka to avoid this 
hamlet, for, being the only inhabited place on the southern face 
of the mountain, it was visited regularly by the man-eater. 
However, man-eater or no man-eater, we could go no farther, so 
to the hamlet— which was a few hundred yards from the track 
— we went. The two families in the hamlet were delighted to 
see us and after we had rested and eaten our evening meal, my 
men were provided with accommodation behind locked doors, 
while I settled down on my camp bed under a tree that 
sheltered the tiny spring which provided the two families with 
drinking water, with a rifle and a lantern to keep me company. 

Lying on my bed that night I had ample time to review the 
situation. Instructions had been issued by Bill Baynes to 
headmen of villages not to disturb any human or other kills, 
pending my arrival. The boy the peshkarof Tanakpur had told 
me about, had been killed on the fourth and it was now the 
night of the sixth. Since leaving the train at Tanakpur we had 
not spared ourselves in an effort to try to get to the scene of 
the killing with as little delay as possible. I knew the tiger 
would have eaten out his kill before our arrival and that, if he 
was not disturbed, he would probably remain in the vicinity for 
a day or two. I had hoped when leaving camp that morning that 
we would reach our destination in time to tie out one of the 
young buffaloes, but the climb up from the Sarda had been too 
much for us. Regrettable as the loss of one day was, it could 
not be helped, and I could only hope that if the tiger had moved 



away from the scene of his kill, he had not gone far. One of the 
disadvantages I had to contend with was that I did not know 
this part of Kumaon. The tiger had been operating for eight 
years and had made one hundred and fifty human kills, so it 
was reasonable to assume he was working over a very large 
area. If contact with him was once lost it might be weeks 
before it could again be made. However, worrying over what 
the tiger had done, or what he might do, was profitless, so I 
went to sleep. 

I was to make an early start and it was still quite dark when 
Ganga Ram roused me by lighting the lantern which had gone 
out during the night. While breakfast was being got ready I had 
a bath at the spring, and the sun was just rising over the Nepal 
mountains when, having cleaned and oiled my -275 Rigby 
Mauser rifle and put five rounds in the magazine, I was ready 
to start. Inter-village communication had been interrupted by 
the man-eater and the two men in the hamlet had not heard 
about the tiger's last kill, so they were unable to give me any 
information as to the direction, or the distance, we would have 
to go. Not knowing when my men would get their next meal I 
told them to have a good one now and to follow me when they 
were ready, keeping close together and selecting open places 
to sit down in when they wanted to rest. 

Rejoining the track up which we had laboured the previous 
evening, I halted for a spell to admire the view. Below me the 
valley of the Sarda was veiled in shadow and a wisp of mist 
showed where the river wound in and out through the foothills 
to emerge at Tanakpur. Beyond Tanakpur the eye could follow 
the river as a gleaming silver ribbon, until lost to sight on the 
horizon. Chuka was in shadow and partly obscured by mist, but 
I could see the path winding up to Thak, every foot of which I 
was to know when hunting the Thak man-eater ten years later. 
Thak village, gifted hundreds of years ago by the Chand Rajas 
of Kumaon to the priests who see the Purnagiri shrines, was 
bathed in the morning sun, as was also the pinnacle of 
Purnagiri. 



Twenty-five years have come and gone since I turned away 
from that view to complete the last stage of my journey to Talla 
Des— a long period, in which much has happened. But time 
does not efface events graven deep on memory's tablets, and 
the events of the five days I spent hunting the man-eating tiger 
of Talla Des are as clear-cut and fresh in my memory today as 
they were twenty-five years ago. 

On the far side of the hill I found the track that I was on joined 
a quite good forest road some six feet wide, running east and 
west. Here I was faced with a dilemma, for there were no 
villages in sight and I did not know in which direction to go. 
Eventually, on the assumption that the road to the east could 
only take me out of my way as far as the Sarda, I decided to try 
it first. 

Given the option of selecting my own time and place for a walk 
anywhere, I would unhesitatingly select a morning in early 
April on the northern face of a well-wooded hill in the 
Himalayas. In April all Nature is at her best; deciduous trees 
are putting out new leaves, each of a different shade of green 
or bronze; early violets, buttercups, and rhododendrons are 
giving way to later primulas, larkspurs, and orchids; and the 
birds— thrushes, babblers, minivets, tits, and a host of others— 
that migrated to the foothills for the winter are back on their 
nesting grounds and vie with each other in their joyous mating 
songs. Walking carefree and at ease in a forest in which there 
is no danger, only those objects and sounds which please the 
senses are looked at and listened to with any degree of 
attention, and all the other less-arresting sights and sounds 
blend together to form a pleasing whole. When there is danger 
from a man-eating tiger, however, the carefree feeling gives 
way to intense awareness. 

Danger not only adds zest to all forms of sport, it also tends to 
sharpen the faculties and to bring into focus all that is to be 
seen and heard in a forest. Danger that is understood, and 
which you are prepared to face, does not detract in any way 



from pleasure. The bank of violets does not lose any of its 
beauty because the rock beyond it may shelter a hungry tiger, 
and the song of the black-headed sibia, poured out from the 
topmost branch of an oak tree, is none the less pleasing 
because a scimitar-babbler at the foot of the tree is warning 
the jungle folk of the presence of danger. 

Fear may not be a heritage to some fortunate few, but I am not 
of their number. After a lifelong acquaintance with wild life I 
am no less afraid of a tiger's teeth and claws today than I was 
the day that a tiger shooed Magog and me out of the jungle in 
which he wanted to sleep. But to counter that fear and hold it 
in check I now have the experience that I lacked in those early 
years. Where formerly I looked for danger all round me and 
was afraid of every sound I heard, I now knew where to look for 
danger, and what sounds to ignore or pay special attention to. 
And, further, where there was uncertainty where a bullet would 
go, there was now a measure of certainty that it would go in 
the direction I wanted it to. Experience engenders confidence, 
and without these two very important assets the hunting of a 
man-eating tiger on foot, and alone, would be a very unpleasant 
way of committing suicide. 

The forest road I was walking on that April morning ran 
through an area in which a man-eating tiger was operating and 
had been used by the tiger frequently, as was evident from the 
scratch marks on it. In addition to these marks, none of which 
was fresh enough to show the pug-marks of the tiger which had 
made them, there were many tracks of 
leopard, sambhar, bear, kakar, and pig. Of birds there were 
many varieties, and of flowers there was great profusion, the 
most beautiful of which was the white butterfly orchid. These 
orchids hang down in showers and veil the branch or the trunk 
of the tree to which their roots are attached. One of the most 
artistic nests I have ever seen was that of a Himalayan black 
bear, made in a tree on which orchids were growing. A big oak 
tree had snapped off, either by weight of snow or in a storm, 
some forty feet above ground. Where the break had taken place 



a ring of branches, the thickness of a man's arm, had sprouted 
out at right angles to the trunk. Here moss had grown and in 
the moss butterfly orchids had found root-hold. It was here 
among these orchids that a bear had made its nest by bending 
over and pressing down the branches on to the broken-off tree 
trunk. The trees selected by bears in which to make their nests 
are of the variety whose branches will bend without snapping. 
The nests have nothing to do with family affairs and I have seen 
them at altitudes of from two thousand to eight thousand feet. 
At the lower altitudes, to which bears descend during the 
winter months to feed on wild plums and honey, the nests give 
protection from ants and flies, and at the higher altitudes they 
enable the animals to bask undisturbed in the sun. 

When a road is interesting its length does not register on one's 
consciousness. I had been walking for about an hour when the 
forest ended and I came out on a grassy ridge overlooking a 
village. My approach over the open ground was observed, and 
when I reached the village the whole population appeared to 
have turned out to greet me. I often wonder whether in any 
other part of the world a stranger whose business was not 
known, arriving unexpectedly at a remote village, would be 
assured of the same welcome and hospitality as he would 
receive at any village throughout the length and breadth of 
Kumaon. I was possibly the first white man who had ever 
approached that village alone and on foot, and yet, by the time 
I reached the assembled people, a square of carpet had been 
produced, a morha (rush seat) placed on it, and I had hardly sat 
down before a brass vessel containing milk was placed in my 
hands. A lifelong association with the hillfolk enables me to 
understand the different dialects that are spoken in Kumaon 
and, what is just as important, to follow their every thought. As 
I had arrived armed with a rifle it was taken for granted that I 
had come to rid them of the man-eater, but what was puzzling 
them was my arrival on foot at that early hour when the 
nearest bungalow at which I could have spent the night was 
thirty miles away. 



Cigarettes, passed round while I was drinking the milk, 
loosened tongues, and after I had answered the many questions 
put to me I put a few of my own. The name of the village, I 
learnt, was Tamali. The village had suffered for many years 
from the man-eater. Some said eight years and others said ten, 
but all were agreed that the man-eater had made its 
appearance the year that Bachi Singh had cut off his toes while 
splitting wood with an axe, and Dan Singh's black bullock, for 
which he had paid thirty rupees, had fallen down the hill and 
got killed. The last person killed at Tamali by the man-eater 
had been Kundan's mother. She had been killed on the 
twentieth day of the previous month (March), while working 
with other women in a field below the village. No one knew 
whether the tiger was a male or a female, but all knew it was a 
very big animal, the fear of which was now so great that the 
outlying fields were no longer being cultivated and no one was 
willing to go to Tanakpur to get the food that was needed for 
the village. The tiger was never absent from Tamali for long, 
and if I stayed with them, which they begged me to do, I would 
have a better chance of shooting it than anywhere else in Talla 
Des. 

To leave people who place implicit trust in you to the tender 
mercies of a man-eater is not easy. However, my reason for 
doing so was accepted, and, after I had assured the fifty or 
more people gathered round me that I would return to Tamali 
at the first opportunity, I bade them goodbye and set off to try 
to find the village where the last kill had taken place. 

At the point where the track from the hamlet met the forest 
road I removed the sign I had placed on the road to indicate to 
my men that I had gone east, and replaced in on the road to the 
west, and, to ensure that there would be no mistake, I put a 
'road closed' sign on the road to the east. The two signs I have 
mentioned are known throughout the hills, and, though I had 
not told my men that I would use them, I knew they would 
understand that I had laid them and would interpret them 
correctly. The first sign consists of a small branch laid in the 



middle of the road, held in position with a stone or bit of wood, 
with the leaves pointing in the direction in which it is intended 
that the person following should go. The second sign consists of 
two branches crossed, in the form of an X. 

The road to the west was level most of the way and ran through 
a forest of giant oak trees standing knee-deep in bracken and 
maidenhair fern. Where there were openings in this forest 
there were magnificent views of hills upon rising hills backed 
by the snowy range extending to east and west as far as the 
eye could see. 

4 

After going for some four miles due west the forest road turned 
to the north and crossed the head of a valley. Flowing down the 
valley was a crystal-clear stream which had its birth in the 
dense oak forest on the hill that towered above me on my left. 
Crossing the stream on stepping-stones, and going up a short 
rise, I came out on an open stretch of ground on the far side of 
which was a village. Some girls coming down from the village 
on their way to the stream caught sight of me as I came out on 
the open ground, and they called out in great excitement, 'The 
Sahib has come! The Sahib has come!' The cry was caught up 
from house to house and before I reached the village I was 
surrounded by an excited throng of men, women, and children. 

From the headman I learnt that the name of the village was 
Talla Kote. That a patwari had arrived two days previously (5 
April) from Champawat, to meet me and to tell all the people in 
the district that a sahib was coming from Naini Tal to try to 
shoot the man-eater. That shortly after the arrival of 
the patwari a woman of the village had been killed by the man- 
eater, and that in obedience to orders received from the Deputy 
Commissioner, Almora, the kill had not been disturbed. And 
finally that in anticipation of my arrival a party of men had 
been sent that morning to look for the kill and, if there was 
anything left of it, to put up a machanfor me. While the 
headman was giving me this information the party, numbering 


some thirty men, returned. These men told me that they had 
searched the ground where the tiger had eaten its kill and that 
all they had been able to find were the woman's teeth. Even her 
clothes, they said, were missing. When I asked where the kill 
had taken place, a lad of about seventeen who was with the 
party of men said that if I would accompany him to the other 
side of the village he would point out to me where his mother 
had been killed by the man-eater. With the lad leading and the 
throng of men, women, and children following me, we went 
through the village to a narrow saddle some fifty yards long 
connecting two hills. This saddle was the apex of two great 
valleys. The one on the left, or western side, swept down 
towards the Ladhya river; the one on the right fell steeply away 
and down ten or fifteen miles to the Kali river. Halting on the 
saddle the lad turned and faced the valley on the right. The 
left-hand or northern, side of this valley was under short grass 
with an odd bush scattered here and there, and the right-hand 
side was under dense scrub and tree jungle. Pointing to a bush 
on the grassy side eight hundred to a thousand yards away and 
a thousand to fifteen hundred feet below us, the lad said his 
mother had been killed near it while cutting grass in company 
with several other women. Then pointing to an oak tree in the 
ravine, the branches of which had been broken by langurs, he 
said it was under that tree that they had found the remains of 
his mother. Of the tiger, he said, neither he nor any of the party 
of men with him had seen or heard anything, but that when 
they were on their way down the hill they had heard first 
a ghooral, and then a little later, a langur calling. 

A ghooral and a langur calling. Ghooral do occasionally call on 
seeing human beings, but not langurs. Both will call on seeing 
a tiger, however. Was it possible that the tiger had lingered 
near the scene of its kill and on being disturbed by the party of 
men had moved off and been seen, first by the ghooral, and 
then by the langur? While I was speculating on this point, and 
making a mental map of the whole country that stretched 
before me, the patwari, who had been having his food when I 



arrived, joined me. Questioned about the two young buffaloes 
for which I had asked Baynes, the patwari said he had started 
out with them from Champawat and that he had left them at a 
village ten miles from Talla Kote, where a boy had been killed 
by the man-eater on 4 April within sight of the village. As there 
was no one on the spot to deal with the man-eater, the body 
had been recovered, and after a report of the occurrence had 
been sent to Champawat, from where it had been telegraphed 
to Tanakpur for my information, he had given orders for the 
body of the boy to be cremated. 

My men had not yet arrived from the hamlet where we spent 
the night, so, after instructing the headman to have my tent 
pitched on the open ground near the stream, I decided to go 
down and have a look at the ground where the tiger had eaten 
his kill, with the object of finding out if the man-eater was male 
or female, and if the latter, whether she had cubs. This part of 
Kumaon was, as I have already said, unknown to me, and when 
I asked the headman if he could tell me the easiest way to get 
down into the valley the lad, who had pointed out to me where 
his mother had been killed and eaten, stepped forward and said 
very eagerly, 'I will come with you. Sahib, and show you the 
way. 1 

The courage of people living in an area in which there is 
danger from a man-eater, and the trust they are willing to place 
in absolute strangers, has always been a marvel to me. The lad, 
whose name I learnt was Dungar Singh, was yet another 
example of that courage and trust. For years Dungar Singh had 
lived in fear of the man-eater and only an hour previously he 
had seen the pitiful remains of his mother. And yet, alone and 
unarmed, he was willing to accompany an absolute stranger 
into an area in which he had every reason to believe— from the 
alarm call of a ghooral and a langur— that the killer of his 
mother was lurking. True, he had only recently visited that 
area, but on that occasion he had been accompanied by thirty 
of his friends, and in numbers there was safety. 



There was no way down the steep hillside from the saddle, so 
Dungar Singh led me back through the village to where there 
was a goat track. As we went down through scattered bushes I 
told him that my hearing was defective, that if he wanted to 
draw my attention to any particular thing to stop and point to 
it, and that if he wanted to communicate with me to come close 
and whisper into my right ear. We had gone about four hundred 
yards when Dungar Singh stopped and looked back. Turning 
round and looking in the same direction, I saw 
the patwari followed by a man carrying a shotgun hurrying 
down the hill after us. Thinking they had important information 
for me, I awaited their arrival and was disappointed to find that 
all the patwari wanted was to accompany me with his gun- 
bearer. This, very reluctantly, I permitted him to do for neither 
he nor his gun-bearer— both of whom were wearing heavy 
boots— looked like men who could move in a jungle without 
making considerable noise. 

We had gone another four hundred yards through dense scrub 
jungle, when we came out on a clearing a few yards square. 
Here, where the goat track divided, one arm going towards a 
deep ravine on the left while the other followed the contour of 
the hill to the right, Dungar Singh stopped, and pointing in the 
direction of the ravine whispered that it was down there that 
the tiger had eaten his mother. As I did not wish the ground on 
which I wanted to look for pug-marks to be disturbed by booted 
men, I told Dungar Singh to stay on the open ground with the 
two men, while I went down alone into the ravine. As I stopped 
talking Dungar Singh whipped round and looked up the hill. 
When I looked in the same direction I saw a crowd of men 
standing on the saddle of the hill where I had stood a little 
while before. With a hand stretched out towards us to ensure 
silence, and the other cupped to his ear, Dungar Singh was 
intently listening, occasionally nodding his head. Then with a 
final nod he turned to me and whispered, 'My brother says to 
tell you that in the wyran field below you, there is something 
red lying in the sun. 1 



A wyran field is one that has gone out of cultivation, and below 
us on such a field there was something red lying in the sun. 
Maybe the red object was only a bit of dry bracken, or 
a kakar or young sambhar, but it might be a tiger. Anyway, I 
was not going to risk spoiling what might turn out to be a 
heaven-sent chance. So, handing my rifle to Dungar Singh, I 
took the patwari and his man, each by an arm, and led them to 
a medlar tree growing near by. Unloading the patwari 1 s gun 
and laying it under a bush, I told the two men to climb the tree 
and on pain of death to remain quietly in it until I ordered them 
to come down. I do not think any two men ever climbed into a 
tree more gladly and from the way they clung to the branches 
after they had climbed as high as it was safe to go, it was 
evident that their views on man-eater hunting had undergone a 
drastic change since they followed me from the village. 

The goat track to the right led on to a terraced field which had 
long been out of cultivation, and on which there was a luxuriant 
growth of oat grass. This field, about a hundred yards long, was 
ten feet wide at my end and thirty feet wide at the other, where 
it terminated on a ridge. For fifty yards the field was straight 
and then it curved to the left. As Dungar Singh saw me looking 
at it, he said that from the farther end we would be able to see 
down on to the wyran field on which his brother had seen the 
red object. Bending down and keeping to the inner edge of the 
field we crept along until we came to the far end. Here we lay 
down, and, crawling on hands and knees to the edge of the 
field, parted the grass and looked down. 

Below us was a small valley with, on the far side, a steep grassy 
slope fringed on the side farthest from us by a dense growth of 
oak saplings. Beyond the saplings was the deep ravine in which 
the man-eater had eaten Dungar Singh's mother. The grassy 
slope was about thirty yards wide and below it was a rock cliff 
which, judging from the trees growing at the foot, was from 
eighty to a hundred feet high. On the near side of the slope was 
a terraced field, a hundred yards long and some ten yards 
wide. The field, which was in a straight line with us, had a 



small patch of short emerald-green grass at our end. On the 
remainder was a dense growth of an aromatic type of weed 
which grows to a height of four or five feet and has leaves like 
chrysanthemums, the undersides of which are white. Lying in 
brilliant sunlight on the patch of grass, and about ten feet 
apart, were two tigers. 

The nearer tiger had its back to us with its head towards the 
hill, and the farther one had its stomach to us with its tail 
towards the hill. Both were fast asleep. The nearer offered the 
better shot, but I was afraid that on hearing the smack of the 
bullet the farther one would go straight down the hill into 
dense cover, in the direction in which its head was pointing. 
Whereas if I fired at the farther one first, the smack of the 
bullet— not to be confused with the crack of the rifle— would 
either drive the nearer one up the hill where there was less 
cover or else drive it towards me. So I decided to take the 
farther one first. The distance was approximately one hundred 
and twenty yards, and the angle of fire was not so steep that 
any allowance had to be made for the lift of the bullet, a point 
which has to be kept in mind when shooting downhill on the 
Himalayas. Resting the back of my hand on the edge of the 
field, to form a cushion, and holding the rifle steady, I took 
careful aim at where I thought the animal's heart would be and 
gently pressed the trigger. The tiger never moved a muscle, but 
the other one was up like a flash and in one bound landed on a 
five-foot-high bank of earth that divided the field from a 
rainwater channel. Here the second tiger stood, broadside on 
to me, looking back over its right shoulder at its companion. At 
my shot it reared up and fell over backwards into the rainwater 
channel, and out of sight. 

After my second shot I saw a movement in the aromatic weeds 
which started close to where the dead tiger was lying. A big 
animal was going at full gallop straight along the field. Having 
started from so close to where the two tigers had been lying, 
this third animal could only be another tiger. I could not see the 
animal, but I could follow its movements by the parting of the 



weeds, the leaves of which were white on the underside. 
Flicking up the two-hundred-yard leaf-sight I waited for the 
animal to break cover. Presently out on to the grassy slope 
dashed a tiger. I now noticed that the slope the tiger was on 
curved to the right, in the same way as the field I was lying on 
curved to the left. As the tiger was keeping to the contour of 
the hill this curve in the slope enabled me to get a near¬ 
broadside shot at it. 

I have seen animals fall over at a shot, and I have seen them 
crumple up, but I have never seen an animal fall as 
convincingly dead as that tiger fell at my shot. For a few 
moments it lay motionless and then it started to slide down, 
feet foremost, gaining momentum as it went. Directly below it, 
and within a few feet of the brink of the rock cliff, was an oak 
sapling eight to ten inches thick. The tiger struck this sapling 
with its stomach and came to rest with its head and forelegs 
hanging down on one side and its tail and hindlegs hanging 
down on the other. With rifle to shoulder and finger on trigger I 
waited, but there was not so much as a quiver in the tiger. 
Getting to my feet I beckoned to the patwari, who from his seat 
on the medlar tree had obtained a grandstand view of the 
whole proceedings. Dungar Singh, who had lain near me 
breathing in short gasps, was now dancing with excitement and 
from the way he was glancing at the tigers and then up at the 
crowd of people on the saddle, I knew he was thinking of the 
tale he would have to tell that night and for many moons 
thereafter. 

When I saw the two tigers lying asleep I concluded that the 
man-eater had found a mate, but later, when my third shot 
flushed a third tiger, I knew I was dealing with a tigress and 
her two cubs. Which of the three was the mother and which the 
cubs it was not possible to say, for all three looked about the 
same size when I had viewed them over the sights of my rifle. 
That one of the three was the man-eater of Talla Des there 
could be no question, for tigers are scarce in the hills, and 
these three tigers had been shot close to where a human being 



had recently been killed and eaten. The cubs had died for the 
sins of their mother. They had undoubtedly eaten the human 
flesh their mother had provided for them from the time they 
were weaned; this, however, did not mean that when they left 
the protection of their mother they would have become man- 
eaters themselves. For in spite of all that has been said 
since Man-eaters of Kumaon was published I still maintain that 
the cubs of man-eating tigers— in that part of India about 
which I am writing— do not become man-eaters simply because 
they have eaten human flesh when young. 

Sitting on the edge of the field with my feet dangling down and 
the rifle resting on my knees, I handed cigarettes to my 
companions and told them I would go and have a look at the 
tiger that had fallen into the rainwater channel, after we had 
finished our smoke. That I would find the tiger dead I had no 
doubt whatsoever; even so, nothing would be lost by waiting a 
few minutes, if for no other reason than to give myself a little 
time to rejoice over the marvellous luck I had met with. Within 
an hour of my arrival at Talla Des I had, quite by accident, got 
in touch with a man-eater that had terrorized an area of many 
hundreds of square miles for eight years, and in a matter of a 
few seconds had shot dead the man-eater and her two cubs. To 
the intense pleasure that all sportsmen feel at having held a 
rifle steady when every drop of blood in one's body is pounding 
with excitement, was added the pleasure and relief of knowing 
that there would be no necessity to follow up a wounded 
animal, a contingency that has to be faced when hunting tigers 
on foot. 

My men would not ascribe my good fortune to luck. To avoid 
the possibility of failure they had consulted the old priest at the 
temple in Naini Tal and he had selected the propitious day for 
us to start on our journey to Talla Des, and evil omens when we 
started had been absent. My success would not be ascribed to 
good luck, therefore; nor, if I had failed to shoot the tigers, 
would my failure have been ascribed to bad luck, for no matter 
how well aimed a bullet might be it could do no harm to an 



animal whose time to die had not come. The superstitions of 
those whom I have been associated with on shikar have always 
been of interest to me. Being myself unwilling to begin a 
journey on a Friday I am not inclined to laugh at a hillman's 
rooted aversion to begin a journey to the north on Tuesday or 
Wednesday to the south on Thursday to the east on Monday or 
Saturday or to the west on Sunday or Friday. To permit those 
who accompany one on a dangerous mission to select the day 
for the start of the journey is a small matter, but it makes all 
the difference between having cheerful and contented 
companions and companions who are oppressed by a feeling of 
impending disaster. 

The four of us sitting on the edge of the field had nearly 
finished our cigarettes, when I noticed that the tiger that was 
resting against the oak sapling was beginning to move. The 
blood from the body had evidently drained into the forward end 
of the animal, making that end heavier than the tail end, and it 
was now slowly slipping down head foremost. Once it was clear 
of the sapling the tiger glissaded down the grassy slope, and 
over the brink of the rock cliff. As it fell through space I threw 
up the rifle and fired. I fired that shot on the spur of the 
moment to give expression to my joy at the success of my 
mission to Talla Des, and also, I am ashamed to admit, to 
demonstrate that there was nothing— not even a tiger falling 
through space— that I could not hit on a day like this. A 
moment after the tiger disappeared among the tree tops, there 
was a rending of branches, followed by a dull and heavy thud. 
Whether or not I had hit the falling tiger did not matter, but 
what did matter was that the men of the village would have 
farther to carry it now than if it had remained on the slope. 

My cigarette finished, I told my companions to sit still while I 
went down to look at the tiger in the rainwater channel. The 
hill was very steep and I had climbed down some fifty feet 
when Dungar Singh called out in a very agitated voice. 'Look, 
Sahib, look. There goes the tiger.' With my thoughts on the 
tiger below me, I sat down and raised my rifle to meet the 



charge I thought was coming. On seeing my preparations, the 
lad called out, 'Not here, but there. Sahib, there. 1 Relieved of 
the necessity of guarding my front I turned my head and looked 
at Dungar Singh and saw he was pointing across the main 
valley to the lower slopes of the hill on which his mother had 
been killed. At first I could see nothing, and then I caught sight 
of a tiger going diagonally up towards a ridge that ran out from 
the main hill. The tiger was very lame and could only take three 
or four steps at a time, and on its right shoulder was a big 
patch of blood. The patch of blood showed it was the tiger that 
had crashed through the trees, for the tiger that had fallen into 
the rainwater channel had been shot in the left shoulder. 

Growing on the hill close to where I was sitting was a slender 
pine sapling. Putting up the three-hundred-yard leaf-sight I got 
a firm grip of the sapling with my left hand and resting the rifle 
on my wrist took a careful and an unhurried shot. The distance 
was close on four hundred yards and the tiger was on a slightly 
higher elevation than I was, so, taking a very full sight, I waited 
until it again came to a stand and then gently pressed the 
trigger. The bullet appeared to take an incredibly long time to 
cover the distance, but at last I saw a little puff of dust and at 
the same moment the tiger lurched forward, and then carried 
on with its slow walk. I had taken a little too full a sight, and 
the bullet had gone a shade too high. I now had the range to a 
nicety and all that I needed to kill the tiger was one more 
cartridge; the cartridge I had foolishly flung away when the 
tiger was falling through the air. With an empty rifle in my 
hands, I watched the tiger slowly and painfully climb to the 
ridge, hesitate for a few moments, and then disappear from 
view. 

Sportsmen who have never shot in the Himalayas will question 
my wisdom in having armed myself with a light -275 rifle, and 
only carrying five rounds of ammunition. My reasons for having 
done so were: 


(a) The rifle was one I had used for over twenty years, and with 



which I was familiar. 


(b) It was light to carry; accurate, and sighted up to three 
hundred yards. 

(c) I had been told by Colonel Barber to avoid using a heavy 
rifle, and not to fire more shots than were necessary with a 
light one. 

With regard to ammunition, I had not set out that morning to 
shoot tigers but to find the village where the last human kill 
had taken place and, if I had the time, to tie out a young buffalo 
as bait. As it turned out, both the light rifle and the five rounds 
would have served my purpose if I had not thrown away that 
vital round. 

My men arrived at the village in time to join the crowd on the 
saddle, and to witness the whole proceedings. They knew that 
the five rounds in the magazine of the rifle were all the 
ammunition I had with me, and when after my fifth shot they 
saw the wounded tiger disappear over the ridge, Madho Singh 
came tearing down the hill with a fresh supply of ammunition. 

The tiger on the patch of green grass, and the tiger in the 
rainwater channel— which I found lying dead where it had 
fallen— were both nearly full-grown, and the one that had got 
away wounded was quite evidently their mother, the man-eater 
of Talla Des. Leaving Madho Singh and Dungar Singh to make 
arrangements for the cubs to be carried up to the village, I set 
out alone to try to get in touch with the wounded tigress. From 
the bed of bracken on to which she had fallen after crashing 
through the trees, I followed a light blood-trail to where she 
had been standing when I fired my last shot. Here I found a few 
cut hairs clipped from her back by my bullet, and a little extra 
blood which had flowed from her wound when she lurched 
forward on hearing my bullet strike the ground above her. 

From this spot to the ridge there was only an occasional drop 
of blood, and on the short stiff grass beyond the ridge I lost the 
trail. Close by was a dense patch of scrub, a hundred yards 



wide, extending up the side of a steep hill for three hundred 
yards, and I suspected that the tigress had taken shelter in this 
scrub. But as night was now closing in and there was not 
sufficient light for accurate shooting, I decided to return to the 
village and leave the searching of the scrub until the following 
day. 

The next morning was spent in skinning the cubs and in 
pegging out their skins with the six-inch nails I had brought 
with me from Naini Tal. While I was performing this task at 
least a hundred vultures alighted on the trees fringing the open 
ground on which my tent was pitched. It was these that 
brought to light the missing clothes of the man-eater's victim, 
for the cubs had torn the blood-soaked garments into strips and 
swallowed them. 

The men of the village sat round me while I was skinning the 
cubs and I told them I wanted them to assist my Garhwalis in 
beating out the patch of scrub in which I thought the wounded 
tigress had taken shelter. This they were very willing to do. At 
about midday we set off, the men going through the village and 
along the saddle to the top of the hill above the cover, while I 
went down the goat track into the valley and up to the ridge 
over which I had followed the tigress the previous evening. At 
the lower edge of the scrub there was an enormous boulder— 
from which I was visible to the men at the top of the hill— I 
waved my hat as a signal for them to start the beat. To avoid 
the risk of anyone getting mauled, I had instructed the men to 
stay on the top of the hill and, after clapping their hands and 
shouting, to roll rocks down the hillside into the scrub I have 
spoken of. One kakar and a few kalege pheasants came out of 
the bushes, but nothing else. When the rocks had searched out 
every foot of the ground, I again waved my hat as a signal for 
the men to stop the beat and return to the village. 

When the men had gone I searched the cover, but without any 
hope of finding the tigress. As I watched her going up the hill 


the previous evening I could see that she was suffering from a 
very painful wound, and when I examined the blood where she 
had lurched forward, I knew the wound was a surface one and 
not internal. Why then had the tigress fallen to my bullet as if 
poleaxed, and why had she hung suspended from the oak 
sapling for a matter of ten to fifteen minutes without showing 
any signs of life? To these questions I could not at the time nor 
can I now find any reasonable answer. Later I found my soft- 
nose, nickel-encased bullet firmly fixed in the ball-and-socket 
joint of the right shoulder. When the flight of a high-velocity 
bullet is arrested by impact with a bone the resulting shock to 
an animal is very considerable. Even so, a tiger is a heavy 
animal with a tremendous amount of vitality, and why a 
light -275 bullet should knock such an animal flat and render it 
unconscious for ten or fifteen minutes is to me inexplicable. 

Returning to the ridge, I stood and surveyed the country. The 
ridge appeared to be many miles long and divided two valleys. 
The valley to the left at the upper end of which was the patch 
of scrub was open grass country, while the valley to the right at 
the upper end of which the tigers had eaten the woman had 
dense tree and scrub jungle on the right-hand side, and a steep 
shaly slope edging in a rock cliff on the left. 

Sitting down on a rock on the ridge to have a quiet smoke, I 
reviewed the events of the previous evening, and came to the 
following conclusions: 

(a) From the time the tigress fell to my shot to the time she 
crashed through the trees, she had been unconscious. 

(b) Her fall, cushioned by the trees and the bed of bracken, had 
restored consciousness but had left her dazed. 

(c) In this dazed condition she had just followed her nose and 
on coming up against the hill she had climbed it without 
knowing where she was going. 

The question that now faced me was: How far and in what 
direction had the tigress gone? Walking downhill with an 



injured leg is far more painful than walking uphill and as soon 
as the tigress recovered from her dazed condition she would 
stop going downhill and would make for cover in which to 
nurse her injury. To get to cover she would have to cross the 
ridge, so the obvious thing was to try to find out if she had 
done so. The task of finding if a soft-footed animal had crossed 
a ridge many miles long would have been a hopeless one if the 
ridge had not had a knife-edge. Running along the top was a 
game track, with an ideal surface for recording the passages of 
all the animals that used it. On the left of the track was a 
grassy slope and on the right a steep shale scree ending in a 
sheer drop into the ravine below. 

Finishing my smoke I set off along the game track on which I 
found the tracks of ghooral, sarao, sambhar, langur, porcupine, 
and the pug-marks of a male leopard. The farther I went the 
more despondent I grew, for I knew that if I did not find the 
tigress's pug-marks on this track there was little hope of my 
ever seeing her again. I had gone about a mile along the ridge, 
disturbing two ghooral who bounded away down the grassy 
slope to the left, when I found the pug-marks of the tigress, and 
a spot of dry blood. Quite evidently, after disappearing from my 
view over the ridge the previous evening, the tigress had gone 
straight down the grassy slope until she recovered from her 
dazed condition and then had kept to the contour of the hill, 
which brought her to the game track. For half a mile I followed 
her pug-marks to where the shale scree narrowed to about 
fifteen yards. Here the tigress attempted to go down the scree, 
evidently with the intention of gaining the shelter of the jungle 
on the far side of the ravine. Whether her injured leg failed her 
or whether dizziness overcame her, I do not know; anyway, 
after falling forward and sliding head-foremost for a few yards 
she turned round and with legs widespread clawed the ground 
in a desperate but vain effort to avoid going over the sheer 
drop into the ravine below. I am as sure-footed as a goat, but 
that scree was far too difficult for me to attempt to negotiate, 
so I carried on along the track for a few hundred yards until I 



came to a rift in the hill. Down this rift I climbed into the 
ravine. 

As I walked up the thirty-yard-wide ravine I noted that the rock 
cliff below the shale scree was from sixty to eighty feet high. 

No animal, I was convinced, could fall that distance on to rocks 
without being killed. On approaching the spot where the 
tigress had fallen I was overjoyed to see the white underside of 
a big animal. My joy, however, was short lived, for I found the 
animal was a sarao and not the tigress. The sarao had evidently 
been lying asleep on a narrow ledge near the top of the cliff 
and, on being awakened by hearing, and possibly scenting, the 
tigress above him, had lost his nerve and jumped down, 
breaking his neck on the rocks at the foot of the cliff. Close to 
where the sarao had fallen there was a small patch of loose 
sand. On this the tigress had landed without doing herself any 
harm beyond tearing open the wound in her shoulder. Ignoring 
the dead sarao, within a yard of which she passed, the tigress 
crossed the ravine, leaving a well-defined blood trail. The bank 
on the right-hand side of the ravine was only a few feet high, 
and several times the tigress tried but failed to climb it. I knew 
now that I would find her in the first bit of cover she could 
reach. But my luck was out. For some time heavy clouds had 
been massing overhead, and before I found where the tigress 
had left the ravine a deluge of rain came on, washing out the 
blood trail. The evening was now well advanced and as I had a 
long and a difficult way to go, I turned and made for camp. 

Luck plays an important part in all sport, and the tigress had— 
so far— had her full share of it. First, instead of lying out in the 
open with her cubs where I would have been able to recognize 
her for what she was, she was lying out of sight in thick cover. 
Then, the flight of my bullet had been arrested by striking the 
one bone that was capable of preventing it from inflicting a 
fatal wound. Later the tigress had twice fallen down a rock 
cliff, where she would undoubtedly have been killed had her 
fall in the one case not been cushioned by branches and a bed 
of bracken and in the other by a soft patch of sand. And finally. 



when I was only a hundred yards from where she was lying up, 
the rain came down and washed out the blood trail. However, I 
too had had a measure of luck, for my fear that the tigress 
would wander away down the greasy slope where I would lose 
touch with her had not been realized, and, further, I knew now 
where to look for her. 

6 

Next morning I returned to the ravine, accompanied by my six 
Garhwalis. Throughout Kumaon the flesh of sarao is considered 
a great delicacy, and as the young animal that had broken its 
neck was in prime condition, it would provide a very welcome 
meat ration for my men. Leaving the men to skin the sarao, I 
went to the spot from where I had turned back the previous 
evening. Here I found that two deep and narrow ravines ran up 
the face of the hill on the right. As it was possible that the 
tigress had gone up one of these, I tried the nearer one first 
only to find, after I had gone up it for a few hundred yards, that 
the sides were too steep for any tiger to climb, and that it 
ended in what in the monsoon rains must have been a thirty- 
foot-high waterfall. Returning to my starting point I called out 
to the men, who were about fifty yards away up the main 
ravine, to light a fire and boil a kettle of water for my tea. I 
then turned to examine the second ravine and as I did so I 
noticed a well-used game track coming down the hill on the 
left-hand side. On the game track I found the pug-marks of the 
tigress, partly obliterated by the rain of the previous evening. 
Close to where I was standing was a big rock. On approaching 
this rock I saw that there was a little depression on the far side. 
The dead leaves in the depression had been flattened down, 
and on them were big clots of blood. After her fall into the 
ravine— which may have been forty hours earlier— the tigress 
had come to this spot and had only moved off on hearing me 
call to the men to boil the kettle for tea. 

Owing to differences in temperament it is not possible to 
predict what a wounded tiger will do when approached by a 
human being on foot, nor is it possible to fix a period during 


which a wounded tiger can be considered as being dangerous— 
that is liable to charge when disturbed. I have seen a tiger with 
an inch-long cut in a hind pad, received while running away, 
charge full out from a distance of a hundred yards five minutes 
after receiving the wound; and I have seen a tiger that had 
been nursing a very painful jaw wound for many hours allow an 
approach to within a few feet without making any attempt to 
attack. Where a wounded man-eating tiger is concerned the 
situation is a little complicated, for, apart from not knowing 
whether the wounded animal will attack on being approached, 
there is the possibility— when the wound is not an internal one 
— of its attacking to provide itself with food. Tigers, except 
when wounded or when man-eaters, are on the whole very 
good-tempered. Were this not so it would not be possible for 
thousands of people to work as they do in tiger-infested 
jungles, nor would it have been possible for people like me to 
have wandered for years through the jungles on foot without 
coming to any harm. Occasionally a tiger will object to too 
close an approach to its cubs or to a kill that it is guarding. The 
objection invariably takes the form of growling, and if this does 
not prove effective it is followed by short rushes accompanied 
by terrifying roars. If these warnings are disregarded, the 
blame for any injury inflicted rests entirely with the intruder. 
The following experience with which I met some years ago is a 
good example of my assertion that tigers are good-tempered. 
My sister Maggie and I were fishing one evening on the Boar 
river three miles from our home at Kaladhungi. I had caught 
two small mahseer and was sitting on a rock smoking when 
Geoff Hopkins, who later became Conservator of Forests, Uttar 
Pradesh, turned up on his elephant. He was expecting friends, 
and being short of meat he had gone out with a -240 rook-rifle 
to try to shoot a kakar or a peafowl. I had caught all the fish we 
needed, so we fell in with Geoff's suggestion that we should 
accompany him and help him to find the game he was looking 
for. Mounting the elephant we crossed the river and I directed 
the mahout to a part of the jungle where kakar and peafowl 
were to be found. We were going through short grass and plum 



jungle when I caught sight of a dead cheetal lying under a tree. 
Stopping the elephant I slipped to the ground and went to see 
what had killed the cheetal. She was an old hind that had been 
dead for twenty-four hours, and as I could find no marks of 
injury on her I concluded that she had died of snakebite. As I 
turned to rejoin the elephant I saw a drop of fresh blood on a 
leaf. The shape of the drop of blood showed that the animal 
from which it had come had been moving away from the 
dead cheetal. Looking a little farther in the direction in which 
the splash from the blood indicated the animal had gone, I saw 
another spot of blood. Puzzled by this fresh blood-trail I set off 
to see where it led to, and signalled to the elephant to follow 
me. After going over short grass for sixty or seventy yards the 
trail led towards a line of thick bushes some five feet high. 
Going up to the bushes where the trail ended I stretched out 
both arms— I had left my rod on the elephant— and parted the 
bushes wide, and there under my outstretched hands was 
a cheetal stag with horns in velvet, and lying facing me and 
eating the stag was a tiger. As I parted the bushes the tiger 
looked up and the expression on its face said, as clearly as any 
words, 'Well, I'll be damned!' Which was exactly what I was 
saying to myself. Fortunately I was so surprised that I remained 
perfectly still— possibly because my heart had stopped beating 
— and after looking straight into my face for a moment the 
tiger, who was close enough to have stretched out a paw and 
stroked my head, rose, turned, and sprang into the bushes 
behind him all in one smooth graceful movement. The tiger had 
killed the stag among the plum bushes shortly before our 
arrival, and in taking it to cover he went past the dead hind, 
leaving the blood trail that I followed. The three on the 
elephant did not see the tiger until he was in the air, when 
the mahout exclaimed with horror, 'Khabardar, Sahib. Sher 
hai.' He was telling me that it was a tiger and to be careful. 

Rejoining my men I drank a cup of tea while they cut up 

the sarao into convenient bits to carry, and returned with them 

to the depression in which I had found the clots of blood. All six 



men had been out on shikarwith me on many occasions, and on 
seeing the quantity of blood they were of the opinion that the 
tigress had a body wound which would prove fatal in a matter 
of hours. On this point we were not in agreement, for I knew 
the wound was a superficial one from which the tigress, given 
time, would recover, and that the longer she lived the more 
difficult it would be to get in touch with her. 

If you can imagine a deep and narrow ravine running up the 
face of a steep hill with the ground on the right sloping towards 
the ravine and well wooded but free of undergrowth, and the 
ground on the left-hand side of the ravine sloping upwards and 
covered with dense patches of ringal (stunted bamboo), 
bracken, and brushwood of all kinds, you will have some idea of 
the country my men and I worked over for the rest of that day. 

My plan was for the men to go up on the right-hand side of the 
ravine, to keep me in sight by climbing into the highest trees 
they could find, and, if they wished to attract my attention, to 
whistle— hillmen, like some boys, are very good at whistling 
through their teeth. They would be in no danger from the 
tigress, for there was no cover on their side, and all of them 
were expert tree-climbers. The tracks of the tigress after she 
left the depression near the big rock showed that she had gone 
up the hill on the left-hand side of the ravine. Up this hill I now 
started to follow her. 

I have emphasized elsewhere that jungle lore is not a science 
that can be learnt from textbooks, but that it can be absorbed a 
little at a time, and that the absorption process can go on 
indefinitely. The same applies to tracking. Tracking, because of 
its infinite variations, is one of the most interesting forms of 
sport I know and it can, at times, be also the most exciting. 
There are two generally accepted methods of tracking. One, 
following a trail on which there is blood, and the other, 
following a trail on which there is no blood. In addition to these 
two methods I have also at times been able to find a wounded 
animal by following blowflies, or by following meat-eating 



birds. Of the two generally accepted methods, following a 
blood-trail is the more sure way of finding a wounded animal. 
But as wounds do not always bleed, wounded animals have at 
times to be tracked by their foot-prints or by the disturbance to 
vegetation caused by their passage. Tracking can be easy or 
difficult according to the nature of the ground, and also 
according to whether the animal being tracked has hard hooves 
or soft pads. When the tigress left the depression— on hearing 
me calling to my men— her wound had stopped bleeding and 
the slight discharge that was coming from the wound owing to 
its having turned septic was not sufficient to enable me to 
follow her, so I had to resort to tracking her by her foot-prints 
and by disturbed vegetation. This, on the ground I was on, 
would not be difficult, but it would be slow, and time was on the 
side of the tigress. For the longer the trail the better the 
chances would be of her recovering from her wound and the 
less chance there would be of my finding her, for the strain of 
the past few days was now beginning to tell on me. 

For the first hundred yards the trail led through knee-high 
bracken. Here tracking was easy, for the tigress had kept to a 
more or less straight line. Beyond the bracken was a dense 
thicket of ringal. I felt sure the tigress would be lying up in this 
thicket, but unless she charged there was little hope of my 
getting a shot at her, for it was not possible to move silently 
through the matted ringals. When I was halfway through the 
thicket akakar started barking. The tigress was on the move, 
but instead of going straight up the hill she had gone out on the 
left, apparently on to open ground, for the kakar was standing 
still and barking. Retracing my steps I worked round to the left 
but found no open ground in that direction, nor did I appear to 
be getting any nearer the barking deer. The kakar, soon after, 
stopped barking and a number of kalege pheasants started 
chattering. The tigress was still on the move, but, turn my head 
as I would, I could not locate the sound. 

Pin-pointing, that is fixing the exact direction and distance of 
all sounds heard, is a jungle accomplishment which I have 



reduced to a fine art and of which I am very proud. Now, for 
the first time, I realized with a shock that my accident had 
deprived me of this accomplishment and that no longer would I 
be able to depend on my ears for safety and for the pleasure of 
listening intimately to the jungle folk whose language it had 
taken me years to learn. Had my remaining ear been sound it 
would not have mattered so much, but unfortunately the drum 
of that ear also had been injured by a gun 'accident 1 many 
years previously. Well, there was nothing that could be done 
about it now, and handicapped though I was I was not going to 
admit at this stage of the proceedings that any tiger, man-eater 
or other, had any advantage over me when we were competing 
for each other's lives under conditions that favoured neither 
side. 

Returning to the bracken, I started to try to find the tigress, 
depending on my eyes only. The jungle appeared to be well 
stocked with game, and I repeatedly heard sambhar, 
kakar, and langur giving their alarm calls, and more than once I 
heard pheasants, jays, and white-capped laughing thrush 
mobbing the tigress. Paying no attention to these sounds, 
which ordinarily I would have listened for eagerly, I tracked the 
tigress foot by foot as, resting frequently, she made her way up 
the hill, at times in a straight line and at times zigzagging from 
cover to cover. Near the top of the hill was a stretch of short 
stiff grass about a hundred yards wide. Beyond this open 
ground were two patches of dense brushwood divided by a 
narrow lane which ran up to the top of the hill. On the short 
stiff grass I lost the tracks. The tigress knew she was being 
closely followed and would therefore expose herself as little as 
possible. The patch of brushwood to my right front was thirty 
yards nearer than the patch to the left, so I decided to try it 
first. When I was within a yard or two of the cover I heard a dry 
stick snap under the weight of some heavy animal. I was 
positive on this occasion that the sound had come from the left, 
so I turned and went to the patch of brushwood from which the 
sound appeared to have come. This was the second mistake I 



made that day— the first was calling to my men to boil the 
kettle for tea— for my men told me later that I crossed the 
open stretch of ground on the heels of the tigress, and that 
when I turned and walked away to the left she was lying on an 
open bit of ground a few yards inside the bushes, evidently 
waiting for me. 

Finding no trace of the tigress in the brushwood on the left I 
came back to the open ground, and, on hearing my men 
whistling, looked in the direction in which I expected them to 
be. They had climbed to the top of a tree a few hundred yards 
to my right, and when I lifted my hand to indicate that I had 
seen them, they waved me up, up, up, and then down, down, 
down. They were letting me know that the tigress had climbed 
to the top of the hill, and that she had gone down on the far 
side. Making what speed I could I went up the narrow lane and 
on reaching the top found an open hillside. On this the grass 
had been burnt recently, and in the ashes, which were still 
damp from the rain of the previous evening, I found the pug- 
marks of the tigress. The hill sloped gently down to a stream, 
the one that I had crossed several miles higher up on the day of 
my arrival at Talla Kote. After lying down and quenching her 
thirst the tigress had crossed the stream and gone up into the 
thick jungle beyond. It was now getting late, so I retraced my 
steps to the top of the hill and beckoned to my men to join me. 

From the big rock where I took up the tracks of the tigress to 
the stream where I left them was only some four miles, and it 
had taken me seven hours to cover the distance. Though it had 
ended in failure the day had been an interesting and exciting 
one. Not only for me who, while doing the tracking, had to 
avoid being ambushed by a wounded man-eating tiger, but also 
for my Garhwalis who by climbing trees had kept both the 
tigress and myself in view most of the time. And it had been a 
long day also, for we had started at daylight, and it was 8 p.m. 
when we got back to camp. 


7 


The following morning while my men were having their food I 
attended to the skins, re-pegging them on fresh ground and 
rubbing wood ashes and powdered alum on the damp parts. 
Tiger skins need a lot of care, for if every particle of fat is not 
removed and the lips, ears, and pads properly treated, the hair 
slips, ruining the skin. A little before midday I was ready to 
start, and accompanied by four of my men— I left the other two 
men in camp to attend to the sarao's skin— I set out for the 
place where I had stopped tracking the tigress the previous 
evening. 

The Valley through which the stream flowed was wide and 
comparatively flat, and ran from west to east. On the left-hand 
side of the valley was the hill on the far side of which I had 
followed the tigress the previous day, and on the right-hand 
side was the hill along which ran the road to Tanakpur. Before 
the advent of the man-eater the valley between these two hills 
had been extensively grazed over by the cattle of Talla Kote, 
and in consequence the ground was criss-crossed by a maze of 
cattle paths, and cut up with narrow eroded water-channels. 
Dotted about the valley were open glades of varying sizes 
surrounded by dense scrub and tree jungle. Good ground on 
which to hunt sambhar, kakar, and bear, all of whose tracks 
were to be seen on the cattle paths, but not the ground one 
would select on which to hunt a man-eating tiger. The hill on 
the left commanded an extensive view of the valley so I spaced 
my men in trees along the crest at intervals of two hundred 
yards to keep a look-out and to be on hand in case they were 
needed. I then went down to the spot where I had left the 
tracks of the tigress the previous evening. 

I had wounded the tigress on 7 April, and it was now the 10th. 
As a general rule a tiger is not considered to be dangerous— 
that is, liable to charge at sight— twenty-four hours after being 
wounded. A lot depends on the nature of the wound, however, 
and on the temper of the wounded individuals. Twenty-four 
hours after receiving a light flesh wound a tiger usually moves 
away on being approached, whereas a tiger with a painful 



body-wound might continue to be dangerous for several days. I 
did not know the nature of the wound the tigress was suffering 
from, and as she had made no attempt to attack me the 
previous day I believed I could now ignore the fact that she was 
wounded and look upon her only as a man-eater, and a very 
hungry man-eater at that, for she had eaten nothing since 
killing the woman whom she had shared with the cubs. 

Where the tigress had crossed the stream there was a channel, 
three feet wide and two feet deep, washed out by rainwater. Up 
this channel, which was bordered by dense brushwood, the 
tigress had gone. Following her tracks I came to a cattle path. 
Here she had left the channel and gone along the path to the 
right. Three hundred yards along was a tree with heavy foliage 
and under this tree the tigress had lain all night. Her wound 
had troubled her and she had tossed about, but on the leaves 
on which she had been lying there was neither blood nor any 
discharge from her wound. From this point on I followed her 
fresh tracks, taking every precaution not to walk into an 
ambush. By evening I had tracked her for several miles along 
cattle paths, water channels, and game tracks, without having 
set eyes on so much as the tip of her tail. At sunset I collected 
my men, and as we returned to camp they told me they had 
been able to follow the movements of the tigress through the 
jungle by the animals and birds that had called at her, but that 
they too had seen nothing of her. 

When hunting unwounded man-eating tigers the greatest 
danger, when walking into the wind, is of an attack from 
behind, and to a lesser extent from either side. When the wind 
is from behind, the danger is from either side. In the same way, 
if the wind is blowing from the right the danger is from the left 
and from behind, and if blowing from the left the danger is 
from the right and from behind. In none of these cases is there 
any appreciable danger of an attack from in front, for in my 
experience all unwounded tigers, whether man-eaters or not, 
are disinclined to make a head-on attack. Under normal 
conditions man-eating tigers limit the range of their attack to 



the distance they can spring, and for this reason they are more 
difficult to cope with than wounded tigers, who invariably 
launch an attack from a little distance, maybe only ten or 
twenty yards, but possibly as much as a hundred yards. This 
means that whereas the former have to be dealt with in a 
matter of split seconds, the latter give one time to raise a rifle 
and align the sights. In either case it means rapid shooting and 
a fervent prayer that an ounce or two of lead will stop a few 
hundred pounds of muscle and bone. 

In the case of the tigress I was hunting, I knew that her wound 
would not admit of her springing and that if I kept out of her 
reach I would be comparatively safe. The possibility that she 
had recovered from her wound in the four days that had 
elapsed since I had last seen her had, however, to be taken into 
account. When therefore I started out alone on the morning of 
11 April to take up the tracks where I had left them the 
previous evening, I resolved to keep clear of any rock, bush, 
tree, or other object behind which the tigress might be lying up 
in wait for me. 

She had been moving the previous evening in the direction of 
the Tanakpur road. I again found where she had spent the 
night, this time on a soft bed of dry grass, and from this point I 
followed her fresh tracks. Avoiding dense cover— possibly 
because she could not move through it silently— she was 
keeping to water channels and game tracks and it became 
apparent that she was not moving about aimlessly but was 
looking for something to kill and eat. Presently, in one of these 
water channels she found and killed a few-weeks-old kakar. She 
had come on the young deer as it was lying asleep in the sun on 
a bed of sand, and had eaten every scrap of it, rejecting 
nothing but the tiny hooves. I was now only a minute or two 
behind her, and knowing that the morsel would have done no 
more than whet her appetite, I redoubled my precautions. In 
places the channels and game tracks to which the tigress was 
keeping twisted and turned and ran through dense cover or 
past rocks. Had my condition been normal I would have 



followed on her footsteps and possibly been able to catch up 
with her, but unfortunately I was far from normal. The swelling 
on my head, face, and neck, had now increased to such 
proportions that I was no longer able to move my head up or 
down or from side to side, and my left eye was closed. 

However, I still had one good eye, fortunately my right one, and 
I could still hear a little. 

During the whole of that day I followed the tigress without 
seeing her and without, I believe, her seeing me. Where she 
had gone along water channels, game tracks, or cattle paths 
that ran through dense cover I skirted round the cover and 
picked up her pug-marks on the far side. Not knowing the 
ground was a very great handicap, for not only did it 
necessitate walking more miles than I need have done, but it 
also prevented my anticipating the movements of the tigress 
and ambushing her. When I finally gave up the chase for the 
day, the tigress was moving up the valley in the direction of the 
village. 

Back in camp I realized that the 'bad time' I had foreseen and 
dreaded was approaching. Electric shocks were stabbing 
through the enormous abscess, and the hammer blows were 
increasing in intensity. Sleepless nights and a diet of tea had 
made a coward of me, and I could not face the prospect of 
sitting on my bed through another long night, racked with pain 
and waiting for something, I knew not what, to happen. I had 
come to Talla Des to try to rid the hill people of the terror that 
menaced them and to tide over my bad time, and all that I had 
accomplished so far was to make their condition worse. 
Deprived of the ability to secure her natural prey, the tigress, 
who in eight years had only killed a hundred and fifty people 
would now, unless she recovered from her wound, look to her 
easiest prey— human beings— to provide her with most of the 
food she needed. There was therefore an account to be settled 
between the tigress and myself, and that night was as suitable 
a time as any to settle it. 



Calling for a cup of tea— made hill-fashion with milk— which 
served me as dinner, I drank it while standing in the moonlight. 
Then, calling my eight men together, I instructed them to wait 
for me in the village until the following evening, and if I did not 
return by then to pack up my things and start early the next 
morning for Naini Tal. Having done this I picked up my rifle 
from where I put it on my bed, and headed clown the valley My 
men, all of whom had been with me for years, said not a word 
either to ask me where I was going or to try to dissuade me 
from going. They just stood silent in a group and watched me 
walk away. Maybe the glint I saw on their cheeks was only 
imagination, or maybe it was only the reflection of the moon. 
Anyway, when I looked back not a man had moved. They were 
just standing in a group as I had left them. 

8 

One of my most pleasant recollections— of the days when I was 
young— are the moonlight walks along forest roads that ten or 
a dozen of us used to take during the winter months, and the 
high teas we consumed on our return home. These walks 
tended to dispel all the fears that assail a human being in a 
forest at night, and, further, they made us familiar with the 
sounds to be heard in a forest by night. Later, years of 
experience added to my confidence and to my knowledge. 

When therefore I left my camp on the night of 11 April— in 
brilliant moonlight— to try conclusions with the Talla Des man- 
eating tigress, I did not set out with any feeling of inferiority on 
what might appear to have been a suicidal quest. 

I have been interested in tigers from as far back as I can 
remember, and having spent most of my life in an area in which 
they were plentiful I have had ample opportunities of observing 
them. My ambition when I was very young was to see a tiger, 
just that, and no more. Later my ambition was to shoot a tiger, 
and this I accomplished on foot with an old army rifle which I 
bought for fifty rupees from a seafaring man, who I am inclined 
to think had stolen it and converted it into a sporting rifle. 

Later still, it was my ambition to photograph a tiger. In the 


course of time all three of these ambitions were fulfilled. It was 
while trying to photograph tigers that I learnt the little I know 
about them. Having been favoured by Government with the 
'freedom of the forests', a favour which I very greatly 
appreciate and which I shared with only one other sportsman 
in India, I was able to move about without let or hindrance in 
those forests in which tigers were most plentiful. Watching 
tigers for days or weeks on end, and on one occasion for four 
and a half months, I was able to learn a little about their habits 
and in particular their method of approaching and of killing 
their victims. A tiger does not run down its prey; it either lies in 
wait or stalks it. In either case contact with its victim is made 
by a single spring, or by a rush of a few yards followed by a 
spring. If therefore an animal avoids passing within striking 
distance of a tiger, avoids being stalked, and reacts instantly to 
danger whether conveyed by sight, scent, or by hearing, it has 
a reasonable chance of living to an old age. Civilization has 
deprived human beings of the keen sense of scent and hearing 
enjoyed by animals, and when a human being is menaced by a 
man-eating tiger he has to depend for his safety almost entirely 
on sight. When restlessness and pain compelled me to be on 
the move that night, I was handicapped to the extent that I only 
had one effective eye. But against this handicap was the 
knowledge that the tigress could do me no harm if I kept out of 
her reach, whereas I could kill her at a distance. My 
instructions therefore to my men to go back to Naini Tal if I 
failed to return by the following evening were not given 
because I thought I could not cope with the tigress, but since I 
feared there was a possibility of my becoming unconscious and 
unable to defend myself. 

One of the advantages of making detailed mental maps of 
ground covered is that finding the way back to any given spot 
presents no difficulty. Picking up the pug-marks of my quarry 
where I had left them, I resumed my tracking, which was now 
only possible on game tracks and on cattle paths, to which the 
tigress was, fortunately, keeping. Sambhar and kakar had now 



come out to the open glades, some to feed and others for 
protection, and though I could not pin-point their alarm calls 
they let me know when the tigress was on the move and gave 
me a rough idea of the direction in which she was moving. 

On a narrow, winding cattle path running through dense cover 
I left the pug-marks of the tigress and worked around through 
scattered brushwood to try to pick them up on the far side. The 
way round was longer than I had anticipated, and I eventually 
came out on an open stretch of ground with short grass and 
dotted about with big oak trees. Here I came to a halt in the 
shadow of a big tree. Presently, by a movement of this shadow, 

I realized that the tree above me was tenanted by a troop 
of langurs. I had covered a lot of ground during the eighteen 
hours I had been on my feet that day and here now was safe 
place for me to rest awhile, for the langurs above would give 
warning of danger. Sitting with my back against the tree and 
facing the cover round which I had skirted, I had been resting 
for half an hour when an old langur gave his alarm call; the 
tigress had come out into the open and the langur had caught 
sight of her. Presently I too, caught sight of the tigress just as 
she started to lie down. 

She was a hundred yards to my right and ten yards from the 
cover, and she lay down broadside on to me with her head 
turned looking up at the calling langur. 

I have had a lot of practice in night shooting, for during the 
winter months I assisted our tenants at Kaladhungi to protect 
their crops against marauding animals such as pig and deer. On 
a clear moonlit night I can usually count on hitting an animal 
up to a range of about a hundred yards. Like most people who 
have taught themselves to shoot, I keep both eyes open when 
shooting. This enables me to keep the target in view with one 
eye, while aligning the sights of the rifle with the other. At any 
other time I would have waited for the tigress to stand up and 
then fired at her, but unfortunately my left eye was now closed 
and a hundred yards was too far to risk a shot with only one 



eye. On the two previous nights the tigress had lain in the one 
spot and had possibly slept most of the night, and she might do 
the same now. If she lay right down on her side— she was now 
lying on her stomach with her head up— and went to sleep I 
could either go back to the cattle path on which I had left her 
pug-marks and follow her tracks to the edge of the cover and 
get to within ten yards of her, or I could creep up to her over 
the open ground until I got close enough to make sure of my 
shot. Anyway, for the present I could do nothing but sit 
perfectly still until the tigress made up her mind what she was 
going to do. 

For a long time, possibly half an hour or a little longer, the 
tigress lay in one position, occasionally moving her head from 
side to side, while the old langur in a sleepy voice continued to 
give his alarm call. Finally she got to her feet and very slowly 
and very painfully started to walk away to my right. Directly in 
the line in which she was going there was an open ravine ten to 
fifteen feet deep and twenty to twenty-five yards wide, which I 
had crossed lower down when coming to the spot where I now 
was. When the tigress had increased the distance between us 
to a hundred and fifty yards, and the chances of her seeing me 
had decreased, I started to follow her. Slipping from tree to 
tree, and moving a little faster than she, I reduced her lead to 
fifty yards by the time she reached the edge of the ravine. She 
was now in range, but was standing in shadow, and her tail end 
was a very small mark to fire at. For a long and anxious minute 
she stood in the one position and then, having made up her 
mind to cross the ravine, very gently went over the edge. 

As the tigress disappeared from view I bent down and ran 
forward on silent feet. Bending my head down and running was 
a very stupid mistake for me to have made, and I had only run a 
few yards when I was overcome by vertigo. Near me were two 
oak saplings, a few feet apart and with inter-laced branches. 
Laying down my rifle I climbed up the saplings to a height of 
ten or twelve feet. Here I found a branch to sit on, another for 
my feet, and yet other small branches for me to rest against. 



Crossing my arms on the branches in front of me, I laid my 
head on them, and at that moment the abscess burst, not into 
my brain as I feared it would, but out through my nose and left 
ear. 

'No greater happiness can man know, than the sudden 
cessation of great pain/ was said by someone who had suffered 
and suffered greatly and who knew the happiness of sudden 
relief. It was round about midnight when relief came to me, and 
the grey light was just beginning to show in the east when I 
raised my head from my crossed arms. Cramp in my legs 
resulting from my having sat on a thin branch for four hours 
had roused me, and for a little while I did not know where I 
was or what had happened to me. Realization was not long in 
coming. The great swelling on my head, face, and neck had 
gone and with it had gone the pain. I could now move my head 
as I liked, my left eye was open, and I could swallow without 
discomfort. I had lost an opportunity of shooting the tigress, 
but what did that matter now, for I was over my bad time and 
no matter where or how far the tigress went I would follow her, 
and sooner or later I would surely get another chance. 

When I last saw the tigress she was heading in the direction of 
the village. Swinging down from the saplings, up which I had 
climbed with such difficulty, I retrieved my rifle and headed in 
the same direction. At the stream I stopped and washed and 
cleaned myself and my clothes as best I could. My men had not 
spent the night in the village as I had instructed them to, but 
had sat round a fire near my tent keeping a kettle of water on 
the boil. As, dripping with water, they saw me coming towards 
them they sprang up with a glad cry of 'Sahib! Sahib! You have 
come back, and you are well . 1 'Yes,' I answered, 'I have come 
back, and I am now well.' When an Indian gives his loyalty, he 
gives it unstintingly and without counting the cost. When we 
arrived at Talla Kote the headman put two rooms at the 
disposal of my men, for it was dangerous to sleep anywhere 
except behind locked doors. On this my bad night, and fully 
alive to the danger, my men had sat out in the open in case they 



could be of any help to me, and to keep a kettle on the boil for 
my tea— if I should return. I cannot remember if I drank the 
tea, but I can remember my shoes being drawn off by willing 
hands, and a rug spread over me as I lay down on my bed. 

Hours and hours of peaceful sleep, and then a dream. Someone 
was urgently calling me, and someone was as urgently saying I 
must not be disturbed. Over and over again the dream was 
repeated with slight variations, but with no less urgency, until 
the words penetrated through the fog of sleep and became a 
reality. 'You must wake him or he will be very angry.' And the 
rejoinder, 'We will not wake him for he is very tired.' Ganga 
Ram was the last speaker, so I called out and told him to bring 
the man to me. In a minute my tent was besieged by an excited 
throng of men and boys all eager to tell me that the man-eater 
had just killed six goats on the far side of the village. While 
pulling on my shoes I looked over the throng and on seeing 
Dungar Singh, the lad who was with me when I shot the cubs, I 
asked him if he knew where the goats had been killed and if he 
could take me to the spot. 'Yes, yes,' he answered eagerly, 'I 
know where they were killed and I can take you there.' Telling 
the headman to keep the crowd back, I armed myself with 
my -275 rifle and, accompanied by Dungar Singh, set off 
through the village. 

My sleep had refreshed me, and as there was now no need for 
me to put my feet down gently— to avoid jarring my head— I 
was able, for the first time in weeks, to walk freely and without 
discomfort. 

The day I arrived at Talla Kote, Dungar Singh, the lad who was 
with me now, had taken me through the village to a narrow 
saddle from where there was an extensive view into two 
valleys. The valley to the right fell steeply away in the direction 
of the Kali river. At the upper end of this valley I had shot the 
cubs and wounded the tigress. The other valley, the one to the 
left, was less steep and from the saddle a goat track ran down 


into it. It was in this valley that the goats had been killed. Down 
the goat track the lad now started to run, with me close on his 
heels. After winding down over steep and broken ground for 
five or six hundred yards, the track crossed a stream and then 
continued down the valley on the left bank. Close to where the 
track crossed the stream there was an open bit of 
comparatively flat ground. Running from left to right across 
this open ground was a low ridge of rock, on the far side of 
which was a little hollow, and lying in the hollow were three 
goats. 

On the way down the hill the lad had told me that round about 
midday a large flock of goats in charge of ten or fifteen boys 
was feeding in the hollow, when a tiger— which they suspected 
was the man-eater— suddenly appeared among them and 
struck down six goats. On seeing the tiger the boys started 
yelling and were joined by some men collecting firewood near 
by. In the general confusion of goats dashing about and human 
beings yelling, the tiger moved off and no one appeared to have 
seen in which direction it went. Grabbing hold of three dead 
goats the men and boys dashed back to the village to give me 
the news, leaving three goats with broken backs in the hollow. 

That the killer of the goats was the wounded man-eater there 
could be no question, for when I last saw her the previous night 
she was going straight towards the village. Further, my men 
told me that an hour or so before my return to camp 
a kakar had barked near the stream, a hundred yards from 
where they were sitting, and thinking that the animal had 
barked on seeing me they had built up the fire. It was fortunate 
that they had done so, for I later found the pug-marks of the 
tigress where she had skirted round the fire and had then gone 
through the village, obviously with the object of securing a 
human victim. Having failed in her quest she had evidently 
taken cover near the village, and at the first opportunity of 
securing food had struck down the goats. This she had done in 
a matter of seconds, while suffering from a wound that made 
her limp badly. 



As I was not familiar with the ground, I asked Dungar Singh in 
which direction he thought the tigress had gone. Pointing down 
the valley he said she had probably gone in that direction, for 
there was heavy jungle farther down. While I was questioning 
him about this jungle, with the idea of going down and looking 
for the tigress, a kalege pheasant started chattering. On 
hearing this the lad turned round and looked up the hill, giving 
me an indication of the direction in which the bird was calling. 
To our left the hill went up steeply, and growing on it were a 
few bushes and stunted trees. I knew the tigress would not 
have attempted to climb this hill, and on seeing me looking at it 
Dungar Singh said the pheasant was not calling on the hill but 
in a ravine round the shoulder of it. As we were not within 
sight of the pheasant, there was only one thing that could have 
alarmed it, and that was the tigress. Telling Dungar Singh to 
leave me and run back to the village as fast as he could go, I 
covered his retreat with my rifle until I considered he was clear 
of the danger zone and then turned round to look for a suitable 
place in which to sit. 

The only trees in this part of the valley were enormous pines 
which, as they had no branches for thirty or forty feet, it would 
be quite impossible to climb. So of necessity I would have to sit 
on the ground. This would be all right during daylight, but if 
the tigress delayed her return until nightfall, and preferred 
human flesh to mutton, I would need a lot of luck to carry me 
through the hour or two of darkness before the moon rose. 

On the low ridge running from left to right on the near side of 
the hollow was a big flat rock. Near it was another and smaller 
one. By sitting on this smaller rock I found I could shelter 
behind the bigger, exposing only my head to the side from 
which I expected the tigress to come. So here I decided to sit. 

In front of me was a hollow some forty yards in width with a 
twenty-foot-high bank on the far side. Above this bank was a 
ten— to twenty-yard— wide flat stretch of ground sloping down 
to the right. Beyond this the hill went up steeply. The three 
goats in the hollow, which were alive when the boys and men 



ran away; were now dead. When striking them down the tigress 
had ripped the skin on the back of one of them. 

The kalege pheasant had now stopped chattering, and I 
speculated as to whether it had called at the tigress as she was 
going up the ravine after the lad and I had arrived or whether 
it had called on seeing the tigress coming back. In the one case 
it would mean a long wait for me, and in the other a short one. 

I had taken up my position at 2 p.m., and half an hour later a 
pair of blue Himalayan magpies came up the valley. These 
beautiful birds, which do a lot of destruction in the nesting 
season among tits and other small birds, have an uncanny 
instinct for finding in a jungle anything that is dead. I heard the 
magpies long before I saw them, for they are very vocal. On 
catching sight of the goats they stopped chattering and very 
cautiously approached. After several false alarms they alighted 
on the goat with the ripped back and started to feed. For some 
time a king vulture had been quartering the sky, and now, on 
seeing the magpies on the goat, he came sailing down and 
landed as lightly as a feather on the dead branch of a pine tree. 
These king vultures with their white shirt-fronts, black coats, 
and red heads and legs, are always the first of the vultures to 
find a kill. Being smaller than other vultures it is essential for 
them to be first at the table, for when the others arrive they 
have to take a back seat. 

I welcomed the vulture's coming, for he would provide me with 
information I lacked. From his perch high up on the pine tree 
he had an extensive view, and if he came down and joined the 
magpies it would mean that the tigress had gone, whereas if he 
remained where he was it would mean that she was lying up 
somewhere close by. For the next half hour the scene remained 
unchanged— the magpies continued to feed, and the vulture 
sat on the dead branch— and then the sun was blotted out by 
heavy rain-clouds. Shortly after, the kalege pheasant started 
chattering again and the magpies flew screaming down the 
valley. The tigress was coming, and here, sooner than I had 
expected, was the chance of shooting her that I had lost the 



previous night when overcome by vertigo. 

A few light bushes on the shoulder of the hill partly obstructed 
my view in the direction of the ravine, and presently through 
these bushes I saw the tigress. She was coming, very slowly 
along the flat bit of ground above the twenty-foot-high bank 
and was looking straight towards me. With only head exposed 
and my soft hat pulled clown to my eyes, I knew she would not 
notice me if I made no movement. So, with the rifle resting on 
the flat rock, I sat perfectly still. When she had come opposite 
to me the tigress sat down, with the bole of a big pine tree 
directly between us. I could see her head on one side of the 
tree and her tail and part of her hindquarters on the other. 

Here she sat for minutes, snapping at the flies that, attracted 
by her wound, were tormenting her. 

10 

Eight years previously, when the tigress was a comparatively 
young animal, she had been seriously injured in an encounter 
with a porcupine. At the time she received this injury she may 
have had cubs, and unable for the time being to secure her 
natural prey to feed herself in order to nourish her cubs, she 
had taken to killing human beings. In doing this she had 
committed no crime against the laws of Nature. She was a 
carnivorous animal, and flesh, whether human or animal, was 
the only food she could assimilate. Under stress of 
circumstances an animal, and a human being also, will eat food 
that under normal conditions they are averse to eating. From 
the fact that during the whole of her man-eating career the 
tigress had only killed a hundred and fifty human beings— 
fewer than twenty a year— I am inclined to think that she only 
resorted to this easily procured form of food when she had cubs 
and when, owing to her injury, she was unable to get the 
requisite amount of natural food needed to support herself and 
her family. 

The people of Talla Des had suffered and suffered grievously 
from the tigress, and for the suffering she had inflicted she was 



now paying in full. To put her out of her misery I several times 
aligned the sights of my rifle on her head, but the light, owing 
to the heavy clouds, was not good enough for me to make sure 
of hitting a comparatively small object at sixty yards. 

Eventually the tigress stood up, took three steps and then stood 
broadside on to me, looking down at the goats. With my elbows 
resting on the flat rock I took careful aim at the spot where I 
thought her heart would be, pressed the trigger, and saw a 
spurt of dust go up on the hill on the far side of her. On seeing 
the dust the thought flashed through my mind that not only had 
I missed the tigress's heart, but that I had missed the whole 
animal. And yet, after my careful aim, that could not be. What 
undoubtedly had happened was that my bullet had gone clean 
through her without meeting any resistance. At my shot the 
tigress sprang forward, raced over the flat ground like a very 
frightened but unwounded animal, and before I could get in 
another shot, disappeared from view. 

Mad with myself for not having killed the tigress when she had 
given me such a good shot, I was determined now that she 
would not escape from me. Jumping down from the rock, I 
sprinted across the hollow, up the twenty-foot bank and along 
the flat ground until I came to the spot where the tigress had 
disappeared. Here I found there was a steep forty-foot drop 
down a loose shale scree. Down this the tigress had gone in 
great bounds. Afraid to do the same for fear of spraining my 
ankles, I sat down on my heels and tobogganed to the bottom. 
At the foot of the scree was a well-used footpath, along which I 
felt sure the tigress had gone, though the surface was too hard 
to show pug-marks. To the right of the path was a boulder- 
strewn stream, the one that Dungar Singh and I had crossed 
farther up, and flanking the stream was a steep grassy hill. To 
the left of the path was a hill with a few pine trees growing on 
it. The path for some distance was straight, and I had run along 
it for fifty or more yards when I heard a ghooral give its alarm 
sneeze. There was only one place where the ghooral could be 
and that was on the grassy hill to my right. Thinking that the 



tigress had possibly crossed the stream and gone up this hill, I 
pulled up to see if I could see her. As I did so, I thought I heard 
men shouting. Turning around, I looked up in the direction of 
the village and saw a crowd of men standing on the saddle of 
the hill. On seeing me look around they shouted again and 
waved me on, straight along the path. In a moment I was on 
the run again, and on turning a corner found fresh blood on the 
path. 

The skin of animals is loose. When an animal that is standing 
still is hit in the body by a bullet and it dashes away at full 
speed, the hole made in the skin does not coincide with the 
hole in the flesh, with the result that, as long as the animal is 
running at speed, little if any blood flows from the wound. 
When, however, the animal slows down and the two holes come 
closer together, blood flows and continues to flow more freely 
the slower the animal goes. When there is any uncertainty as to 
whether an animal that has been fired at has been hit or not, 
the point can be very easily cleared up by going to the exact 
spot where the animal was when fired at, and looking for cut 
hairs. These will indicate that the animal was hit, whereas the 
absence of such hairs will show that it was clean missed. 

After going round the corner the tigress had slowed down, but 
she was still running, as I could see from the blood 
splashes, and in order to catch up with her I put on a spurt. I 
had not gone very far when I came to spur jutting out from the 
hill on my left. Here the path bent back at a very acute angle, 
and not being able to stop myself, and there being nothing for 
me to seize hold of on the hillside, I went over the edge of the 
narrow-path all standing. Ten to fifteen feet below was a small 
rhododendron sapling, and below the sapling a sheer drop into 
a dark and evil-looking ravine where the stream, turning at 
right angles, had cut away the toe of the hill. As I passed the 
sapling with my heels cutting furrows in the soft earth, I 
gripped it under my right arm. The sapling, fortunately, was not 
uprooted, and though it bent it did not break. Easing myself 
round very gently, I started to kick footholds in the soft loamy 



hill-face which had a luxuriant growth of maidenhair fern. 

The opportunity of catching up with the tigress had gone, but I 
now had a well-defined blood-trail to follow, so there was no 
longer any need for me to hurry. The footpath which at first had 
run north now ran west along the north face of a steep and 
well-wooded hill. When I had gone for another two hundred 
yards along the path, I came to flat ground on a shoulder of the 
hill. This was the limit I would have expected a tiger shot 
through the body to have travelled, so I approached the flat 
ground, on which there was a heavy growth of bracken and 
scattered bushes, very cautiously. 

A tiger that has made up its mind to avenge an injury is the 
most terrifying animal to be met with in an Indian jungle. The 
tigress had a very recent injury to avenge and she had 
demonstrated— by striking down six goats and by springing 
and dashing away when I fired at her— that the leg wound she 
had received five days before was no handicap to rapid 
movement. I felt sure, therefore, that as soon as she became 
aware that I was following her and she considered that I was 
within her reach, she would launch an all-out attack on me, 
which I would possibly have to meet with a single bullet. 
Drawing back the bolt of the rifle, I examined the cartridge 
very carefully and satisfied that it was one of a fresh lot I had 
recently got from Manton in Calcutta, I replaced it in the 
chamber, put back the bolt, and threw off the safety catch. 

The path ran through the bracken, which was waist high and 
which met over it. The blood trail led along the path into the 
bracken, and the tigress might be lying up on the path or on 
the right or the left-hand side of it. So I approached the 
bracken foot by foot and looking straight ahead for, on these 
occasions, it is unwise to keep turning the head, when I was 
within three yards of the bracken I saw a movement a yard 
from the path on the right. It was the tigress gathering herself 
together for a spring. Wounded and starving though she was, 
she was game to fight it out. Her spring, however, was never 



launched, for, as she rose, my first bullet raked her from end to 
end, and the second bullet broke her neck. 

Days of pain and strain on an empty stomach left me now 
trembling in every limb, and I had great difficulty in reaching 
the spot where the path bent back at an acute angle and 
where, but for the chance dropping of a rhododendron seed, I 
would have ended my life on the rocks, below. 

The entire population of the village, plus my own men, were 
gathered on the saddle of the hill and on either side of it, and I 
had hardly raised my hat to wave when, shouting at the top of 
their voices, the men and boys came swarming down. My six 
Garhwalis were the first to arrive. Congratulations over, the 
tigress was lashed to a pole and six of the proudest Garhwalis 
in Kumaon carried the Talla Des man-eater in triumph to Talla 
Kote village. Here the tigress was laid down on a bed of straw 
for the women and children to see, while I went back to my 
tent for my first solid meal in many weeks. An hour later with a 
crowd of people around me, I skinned the tigress. 

My first bullet, a -275 soft-nose with split nickel case fired on 7 
April, was bushed and firmly fixed in the ball-and-socket joint 
of the tigress's right shoulder. The second and third bullets, 
fired as she was falling through the air and climbing up the hill, 
had missed her. The fourth, fired on 12 April, had gone clean 
through without striking any bones, and the fifth and sixth had 
killed her. From her right foreleg and shoulder I found some 
twenty porcupine quills, ranging in length from two to six 
inches, which were firmly embedded in muscle and were 
undoubtedly the cause of the tigress's having become a man- 
eater. 

I spent the following day in partly drying the skin, and three 
days later I was safely back in my home with my bad time 
behind me. Baynes very kindly sent for Dungar Singh and his 
brother, and at a public function at Almora thanked them for 
the help they had given me and presented them with my token 
of gratitude. 



A week after my return to Naini Tal, Sir Malcolm Hailey gave 
me an introduction to Colonel Dick, an ear specialist, who 
treated me for three months in his hospital in Lahore and 
restored my hearing sufficiently for me to associate with my 
fellow men without embarrassment, and gave me back the joy 
of hearing music and the song of birds. 



Epilogue 

THE STORY OF THE TALLA DES MAN-EATER— which I 
refrained from telling until I had written Jungle Lore— has now 
been told. I am aware that to many the story will seem 
incredible, and to none more so than to those who have 
themselves hunted tigers. None knows better than I that the 
hunting of tigers on foot is not a popular sport, and that the 
hunting of man-eaters on foot is even less so. I also know that 
the following-up of a wounded tiger on foot is a task that is 
sought by none and dreaded by all. And yet, knowing these 
things, I have told of the hunting of a man-eating tiger on foot, 
not only by day but also by night, and the chasing on foot of a 
wounded tiger. Small wonder, then, if my story to many should 
seem incredible. 

There are few places in Kumaon where a fortnight's holiday 
could be more pleasantly spent than along the eastern border 
of the Almora district. Hiking in the Himalayas is becoming a 
very popular pastime, and I could suggest no more pleasant 
hike for a sportsman or for a party of young army men or 
students than the following: 

Start from Tanakpur, but before doing so get the peshkar to 
give you a tahsil peon to show you where the epic fight took 
place between the elephant and the two tigers. From Tanakpur 
go via Baramdeo to Purnagiri. Here, after doing darshan at the 
temple, learn all you can from the High Priest and the 
temple pujaris about the lights that appear on the far side of 
the Sarda, and similar manifestations, as for example the fire 
with an old man sitting near it telling his beads that is to be 
seen during certain seasons at the foot of the Pindari glacier. 
From Purnagiri a track used by the priests will take you to 
Thak village. This is beautifully situated, and while you rest and 
admire the view, get the headman or any of the other men 
sitting round to give you his version of the shooting of the Thak 
and of the Chuka man-eating tigers. Tewari, a relative of the 
headman and as fine a type of a hill Brahmin as you will see. 



wall then show you where his brother whose body he helped 
me find was killed, the mango tree with a spring at its roots, 
and the rock on the way down to Chuka where I shot the Thak 
man-eater. He will also, if you have the time, show you 
the ficus tree from which I shot the Chuka man-eater. At Chuka 
inguire for Kunwar Singh, and hear his story of the hunting of 
the two tigers. 

From Chuka to Talla Kote is a long march, and it will be 
advisable to start at the crack of dawn. Having forded the 
Ladhya near its junction with the Sarda, you will come to Sem. 
The headman of Sem, who was a boy when I knew him, will 
show you where the man-eater killed his mother while she was 
cutting grass near their home. With Sem behind you and a stiff 
climb accomplished, you will pass the small hamlet where I 
spent a night under a mango tree. After going over the ridge 
you will come to a forest road. Take the turn to the left and 
follow the road until you come to a stream. Cross the stream 
and the small patch of open ground on which my 40-lb tent was 
pitched, and you have reached you destination, Talla Kote. 

Dungar Singh, malguzar (land-holder) of Talla Kote, will now be 
about forty years of age. Give him my salams and ask him to 
take you to the ling or saddle from which there is an extensive 
view into two valleys. Face first the valley to the east and get 
Dungar Singh to point out the bush where his mother was 
killed, the oak tree under which she was eaten, the wyran field 
on which the young tigers were shot, and the grassy hill up 
which the wounded tigress went. Then turn round, walk a few 
steps, and face the valley to the west. Dungar Singh will now 
point out where the six goats were killed, where the tigress 
was standing when my bullet went through her, and the 
footpath along which she dashed and along which I ran after 
her. 

The hunting of no other tiger has ever been witnessed by a 
greater number of non-participants than witnessed the hunting 
of the Talla Des man-eating tiger. Some of those will have 



passed away, but many will still remain and they will not have 
forgotten my visit or the thrilling events of the week I spent 
with them. 

-END- 



BOOK THRF.F.: 

THE MAN-FATTNO 

LEOPARD 
OF RUDRAPRAYAO 






The Pilgrim Road 

IF YOU ARE A HINDU FROM the sun-scorched plains of India 
and you desire— as all good Hindus do— to perform the 
pilgrimage to the age-old shrines of Kedarnath and Badrinath, 
you must start on your pilgrimage from Hardwar and, in order 
to acquire a full measure of the merits vouch-safed to you for 
the correct performance of the pilgrimage, you must walk 
every step of the way from Hardwar to Kedarnath and, thence, 
over the mountain track to Badrinath, barefoot. 

Having purified yourself by immersion in the sacred Har-ki- 
pauri pool, done darshan at the many shrines and temples in 
Hardwar, and added your mite to their coffers, you must not 
omit to toss a coin within reach of the festering stumps— which 
once were hands— of the lepers who line the narrowest part of 
the pilgrim road above the sacred pool, for if you make this 
omission, they will call down curses on your head. What matter 
if these unfortunate ones have wealth beyond your dreams 
secreted in their filthy rags, or in the rock caves they call their 
homes? The curses of such as they were best avoided, and 
immunity will cost you but a few coppers. 

You have now done all that custom and religion require of a 
good Hindu and are at liberty to start on your long and hard 
pilgrimage. 

The first place of interest you will come to after leaving 
Hardwar is Rishikesh. Here you will make your first 
acquaintance with the Kalakamli Wallahas, so called because of 
the black blanket their founder wore— and which many of his 
disciples still wear— in the form of a habit or loose cloak bound 
round the middle with a cord of goat's hair; and who are 
renowned throughout the land for their good deeds. I do not 
know if any of the other religious brotherhoods you will meet 
on your pilgrimage have any claim to renown, but I do know 
that the Kalakamli Wallahas have such a claim, and justly so, 
for out of the offerings they receive at their many shrines and 
temples, they have built— and they maintain— hospitals. 



dispensaries, and pilgrim shelters, and they feed the poor and 
the needy. 

With Rishikesh behind you, you will come next to Lachman 
Jhula, where the pilgrim road crosses from the right to the left 
bank of the Ganges on a suspension bridge. Here beware of the 
red monkeys who infest the bridge, for they are even more 
importunate than the lepers of Hardwar, and if you omit to 
propitiate them with offerings of sweets, or parched gram, your 
passage across the long and narrow bridge is likely to be both 
difficult and painful. 

Three-day's journey up the left bank of the Ganges and you 
have reached the ancient capital of Garhwal— Shreenagar— an 
historic, religious, and trading centre of considerable 
importance and of great beauty, nestling in a wide, open valley 
surrounded by high mountains. It was here, in the year 1805, 
that the forebears of the Garhwali soldiers who have fought so 
gallantly in two world wars made their last, and unsuccessful, 
stand against the Gurkha invaders, and it is a matter of great 
regret to the people of Garhwal that their ancient city of 
Shreenagar, together with the palaces of their kings, was swept 
away, to the last stone, by the bursting of the Gohna Lake dam 
in 1894. This dam, caused by a landslide in the valley of the 
Birehi Ganga, a tributary of the Ganges, was 11,000 feet wide 
at the base, 2,000 feet wide at the summit, and 900 feet high 
and, when it burst, ten billion cubic feet of water were released 
in the short space of six hours. So well was the bursting of the 
dam timed that though the flood devastated the valley of the 
Ganges right down to Hardwar and swept away every bridge, 
only one family was lost, the members of which had returned to 
the danger-zone after having been forcibly removed from it. 

From Shreenagar you have to face a stiff climb to Chatikhal, 
which is compensated for by the magnificent views you will get 
of the Ganges valley and of the eternal snows above Kedarnath. 

A day's march from Chatikhal and you see in front of you 
Golabrai with its row of grass-thatched pilgrim shelters, a one- 



roomed stone-built house, and its drinking trough. This big and 
imposing drinking trough is fed by a tiny crystal-clear stream 
which, in summer, is sedately conducted down the mountain¬ 
side by a series of channels rough-hewn from pine saplings. At 
other seasons of the year the water cascades unconfined and 
merrily over rocks draped with moss and maidenhair fern, 
through luxuriant beds of vivid green watercress and sky-blue 
strobilanthes. 

A hundred yards beyond the pilgrim shelters, and on the right- 
hand side of the road, stands a mango tree. This tree and the 
two-storied house above it which is the home of the pundit, 
who owns the Golabrai pilgrim shelters, are worthy of note, for 
they play an important part in the tale I have to tell. 

Another two miles, along the last flat bit of ground you will see 
for many a day, and you have reached Rudraprayag, where you 
and I, my pilgrim friend, must part, for your way lies across the 
Alaknanda and up the left bank of the Mandakini to Kedarnath, 
while mine lies over the mountains to my home in Naini Tal. 

The road in front of you, which has been trodden by the feet of 
millions of pilgrims like you, is excessively steep and incredibly 
rough; and you, whose lungs have never breathed air above sea 
level, who have never climbed anything higher than the roof of 
your house, and whose feet have never trodden anything 
harder than yielding sand, will suffer greatly. Times there will 
be, a-many, when, gasping for breath, you toil up the face of 
steep mountains on feet torn and bleeding by passage over 
rough rocks, sharp shale, and frozen ground, when you will 
question whether the prospective reward you seek is worth the 
present price you pay in suffering; but being a good Hindu you 
will toil on, comforting yourself with the thought that merit is 
not gained without suffering, and the greater the suffering in 
this world, the greater the reward in the next. 



The Man-Eater 

'PRAYAG' IS THE HINDI WORD FOR 'confluence'. At 
Rudraprayag, two rivers— the Mandakini coming down from 
Kedarnath, and the Alaknanda from Badrinath— meet, and 
from here onwards the combined waters of the two rivers 
are known to all Hindus as Ganga Mai, and to the rest of the 
world as the Ganges. [The author is mistaken; the river 
continues as Alaknanda upto Devaprayag, where it becomes 
the Ganges on meeting the Bhagirathi.] 

When an animal, be it a leopard or be it a tiger, becomes a 
man-eater, it is given a place-name for purposes of 
identification. The name so given to a man-eater does not 
necessarily imply that the animal began its man-eating career 
at, or that all its kills were confined to, that particular place. It 
is quite natural that the leopard which started its man-eating 
career at a small village twelve miles from Rudraprayag, on the 
Kedarnath pilgrim route, should have been known for the rest 
of its career as the Man-eating Leopard of Rudraprayag. 

Leopards do not become man-eaters for the same reasons that 
tigers do. Though I hate to admit it, our leopards— the most 
beautiful and the most graceful of all the animals in our 
jungles, and who when cornered or wounded are second to 
none in courage— are scavengers to the extent that they will, 
when driven by hunger, eat any dead thing they find in the 
jungle, just as lions will in the African bush. 

The people of Garhwal are Hindus, and as such cremate their 
dead. The cremation invariably takes place on the bank of a 
stream or river in order that the ashes may be washed down 
into the Ganges and eventually into the sea. As most of the 
villages are situated high up on the hills, while the streams of 
rivers are in many cases miles away down in the valleys, it will 
be realized that a funeral entails a considerable tax on the 
manpower of a small community when, in addition to the 
carrying party, labour has to be provided to collect and carry 
the fuel needed for the cremation. In normal times these rites 



are carried out very effectively; but when disease in epidemic 
form sweeps through the hills, and the inhabitants die faster 
than they can be disposed of, a very simple rite, which consists 
of placing a live coal in the mouth of the deceased, is 
performed in the village, and the body is then carried to the 
edge of the hill and cast into the valley below. 

A leopard, in an area in which his natural food is scarce, 
finding these bodies, very soon acquires a taste for human 
flesh, and when the disease dies down and normal conditions 
are re-established, he, very naturally, on finding his food-supply 
cut off, takes to killing human beings. In the wave of epidemic 
influenza that swept through the country in 1918 and that cost 
India over a million lives, Garhwal suffered very severely, and it 
was at the end of this epidemic that the Garhwal man-eater 
made his appearance. 

The first human kill credited to the man-eating leopard of 
Rudraprayag is recorded as having taken place at Bainji village 
on 9 June 1918, and the last kill for which the man-eater was 
responsible took place at Bhainswara village on 14 April 1926. 
Between these two dates the number of human kills recorded 
by Government was one hundred and twenty-five. 

While I do not think that this figure, of one hundred and 
twenty-five, is our to the extent claimed by Government 
officials who served in Garhwal at that time and by residents in 
the area in which the man-eater was operating, I do know that 
the figure given is not correct, for some kills which took place 
while I was on the ground have not been shown in the records. 

In crediting the man-eater with fewer kills than he was actually 
responsible for, I do not wish to minimize in any way the 
sufferings endured by the people of Garhwal for eight long 
years, nor do I wish to detract in any way from the reputation 
of the animals which the people of Garhwal claim as having 
been the most famous man-eating leopard of all time. 

However, be the number of human kills what they may. 



Garhwal can claim that this leopard was the most publicized 
animal that has ever lived, for he was mentioned— to my 
knowledge— in the press of the United Kingdom, America, 
Canada, South Africa, Kenya, Malaya, Hong Kong, Australia, 
New Zealand, and in most of the dailies and weeklies in India. 

In addition to this newspaper publicity, tales of the man-eater 
were carried to every part of India by the sixty thousand 
pilgrims who annually visit the shrines of Kedarnath and 
Badrinath. 

The procedure laid down by Government in all cases of human 
beings alleged to have been killed by man-eaters is for the 
relatives or friends of the deceased to lodge a report with the 
village patwari as soon after the occurrence as possible. On 
receipt of the report the patwari proceeds to the spot, and if 
the body of the victim has not been found before his arrival he 
organizes a search party, and with their aid endeavours to find 
the victim. If the body has been found before his arrival, or if 
the search party finds it, the patwari holds an inquiry on the 
spot and when satisfied that it is a genuine kill by a man-eater, 
and not a case of murder, he gives the relatives permission to 
remove the remains for cremation or for burial, according to 
the caste or creed of the victim. The kill is duly recorded in his 
register against the man-eater operating in that area, and a full 
report of occurrence is submitted to the administrative head of 
the district— the Deputy Commissioner— who also keeps a 
register in which all the man-eater's kills are recorded. In the 
event, however, of the body, or any portion of it, not being 
found— as sometimes happens, for man-eaters have an 
annoying habit of carrying their victims for long distances— the 
case is held over for further inquiry, and the man-eater is not 
credited with the kill. Again, when people are mauled by a 
man-eater and subsequently die from their injuries, the man- 
eater concerned is not credited with their deaths. 

It will thus be seen that though the system adopted for 
recording the kills of man-eaters is as good as it can be, it is 



possible for one of these abnormal animals to be responsible 
for more human kills than he is finally credited with, especially 
when his operations extend over a long period of years. 



Terror 

THE WORD 'TERROR' IS SO generally and universally used in 
connection with everyday trivial matters that it is apt to fail to 
convey when intended to do so, its real meaning. I should like 
therefore to give you some idea of what terror— real terror- 
meant to the fifty thousand inhabitants living in the five 
hundred square miles of Garhwal in which the man-eater was 
operating, and to the sixty thousand pilgrims who annually 
passed through that area between the years 1918 and 1926. 
And I will give you a few instances to show you what grounds 
the inhabitants, and the pilgrims, had for that terror. 

No curfew order has ever been more strictly enforced, and 
more implicitly obeyed, than the curfew imposed by the man- 
eating leopard of Rudraprayag. 

During the hours of sunlight life in that area carried on in a 
normal way. Men went long distances to the bazaars to transact 
business, or to outlying villages to visit relatives or friends; 
women went up the mountainsides to cut grass for thatching or 
for cattle-fodder; children went to school or into the jungles to 
graze goats or to collect dry sticks, and, if it was summer, 
pilgrims, either singly or in large numbers, toiled along the 
pilgrim routes on their way to and from the sacred shrines of 
Kedarnath and Badrinath. 

As the sun approached the western horizon and the shadows 
lengthened, the behaviour of the entire population of the area 
underwent a very sudden and a very noticeable change. Men 
who had sauntered to the bazaars or to outlying villages were 
hurrying home; women carrying great bundles of grass were 
stumbling down the steep mountain-sides; children who had 
loitered on their way from school, or who were late in bringing 
in their flocks of goats or the dry sticks they had been sent out 
to collect, were being called by anxious mothers, and the weary 
pilgrims were being urged by any local inhabitant who passed 
them to hurry to shelter. 



When night came, an ominous silence brooded over the whole 
area— no movement and no sound anywhere. The entire local 
population was behind fast-closed doors and, in many cases, 
had sought further protection by building additional doors. 
Those of the pilgrims who had not been fortunate enough to 
find accommodation inside houses were huddled close together 
in pilgrim shelters. And all, whether in house or shelter, were 
silent for fear of attracting the dread man-eater. 

This is what terror meant to the people of Garhwal, and to the 
pilgrims, for eight long years. 

I will now give a few instances to show you what grounds there 
were for that terror. 

A boy, an orphan aged fourteen, was employed to look after a 
flock of forty goats. He was of the depressed— untouchable- 
class, and each evening when he returned with his charges he 
was given his food and then shut into a small room with the 
goats. The room was on the ground floor of a long row of 
double-storied buildings and was immediately below the room 
occupied by the boy's master, the owner of the goats. To 
prevent the goats crowding in on him as he slept, the boy had 
fenced off the far left-hand corner of the room. 

This room had no windows and only one door, and when the 
boy and the goats were safely inside, the boy's master pulled 
the door to, and fastened it by passing the hasp, which was 
attached by a short length of chain to the door, over the staple 
fixed in the lintel. A piece of wood was then inserted in the 
staple to keep the hasp in place, and on his side of the door the 
boy, for his better safety, rolled a stone against it. 

On the night the orphan was gathered to his fathers; his master 
asserts the door was fastened as usual, and I have no reason to 
question the truth of his assertion. In support of it, the door 
showed many deep claw-marks, and it is possible that in his 
attempts to claw open the door the leopard displaced the piece 
of wood that was keeping the hasp in place, after which it 



would have been easy for him to push the stone aside and enter 
the room. 


Forty goats packed into a small room, one corner of which was 
fenced off, could not have left the intruder much space to 
manoeuvre in, and it is left to conjecture whether the leopard 
covered the distance from the door to the boy's corner of the 
room over the backs of the goats or under their bellies, for at 
this stage of the proceedings all the goats must have been on 
their feet. 

It were best to assume that the boy slept through all the noise 
the leopard must have made when trying to force open the 
door, and that the goats must have made when the leopard had 
entered the room, and that he did not cry for help to deaf ears, 
only screened from him and the danger that menaced him by a 
thin plank. 

After killing the boy in the fenced-off corner, the leopard 
carried him across the empty room— the goats had escaped 
into the night— down a steep hillside, and then over some 
terraced fields to a deep boulder-strewn ravine. It was here, 
after the sun had been up a few hours, that the master found 
all that the leopard had left of his servant. 

Incredible as it may seem, not one of the forty goats had 
received so much as a scratch. 

A neighbour had dropped in to spend the period of a long 
smoke with a friend. The room was L-shaped and the only door 
in it was not visible from where the two men sat on the floor 
with their backs to the wall, smoking. The door was shut but 
not fastened, for up to that night there had been no human kills 
in the village. 

The room was in darkness and the owner of it had just passed 
the hookah to his friend when it fell to the ground, scattering a 
shower of burning charcoal and tobacco. Telling his friend to be 
more careful or he would set the blanket on which they were 
sitting on fire, the man bent forward to gather up the embers 



and, as he did so, the door came into view. A young moon was 
near setting and, silhouetted against it, the man saw a leopard 
carrying his friend through the door. 

When recounting the incident to me a few days later the man 
said: 'I am speaking the truth, sahib, when I tell you I never 
heard even so much as the intake of a breath, or any other 
sound, from my friend who was sitting only an arm's-length 
from me, either when the leopard was killing him, or when it 
was carrying him away. There was nothing I could do for my 
friend, so I waited until the leopard had been gone some little 
while, and then I crept up to the door and hastily shut and 
secured it. 1 

The wife of the headman of a village was ill from a fever, and 
two friends had been called in to nurse her. 

There were two rooms in the house. The outer room had two 
doors, one opening on to a small flagged courtyard, and the 
other leading into the inner room. This outer room also had a 
narrow slip of a window set some four feet above floor level, 
and in this window, which was open, stood a large brass vessel 
containing drinking-water for the sick woman. 

Except for the one door giving access to the outer room, the 
inner room had no other opening in any of its four walls. 

The door leading out on to the courtyard was shut and securely 
fastened, and the door between the two rooms was wide open. 

The three women in the inner room were lying on the ground, 
the sick woman in the middle with a friend on either side of 
her. The husband in the outer room was on a bed on the side of 
the room nearest the window, and on the floor beside his bed, 
where its light would shine into the inner room, was a lantern, 
turned down low to conserve oil. 

Round about midnight, when the occupants of both the rooms 
were asleep, the leopard entered by way of the narrow slip of a 
window; avoiding in some miraculous way knocking over the 



brass vessel which nearly filled it, skirted round the man's low 
bed and, entering the inner room, killed the sick woman. It was 
only when the heavy brass vessel crashed to the floor as the 
leopard attempted to lift its victim through the window that the 
sleepers awoke. 

When the lantern had been turned up the woman who had been 
sick was discovered lying huddled up under the window, and in 
her throat were four great teeth-marks. 

A neighbour, whose wife had been one of the nurses on that 
night, when relating the occurrence to me said, 'The woman 
was very ill from her fever and was likely to have died in any 
case, so it was fortunate that the leopard selected her. 1 

Two Gujars were moving their herd of thirty buffaloes from one 
grazing-ground to another, and accompanying them was the 
twelve-year-old daughter of the older of the two men, who were 
brothers. 

They were strangers to the locality and either had not heard of 
the man-eater or, which is more probable, thought the 
buffaloes would give them all the protection they needed. 

Near the road and at an elevation of eight thousand feet was a 
narrow strip of flat ground below which was a sickle-shaped 
terraced field, some quarter of an acre in extent, which had 
long been out of cultivation. The men selected this site for their 
camp and having cut stakes from the jungle which surrounded 
them on all sides, they drove them deep into the field and 
tethered their buffaloes in a long row. 

After the evening meal prepared by the girl had been eaten, the 
party of three laid their blankets on the narrow strip of ground 
between the road and the buffaloes and went to sleep. 

It was a dark night, and some time towards the early hours of 
the morning the men were awakened by the booming of their 
buffalo-bells and by the snorting of the frightened animals. 
Knowing from long experience that these sounds indicated the 



presence of carnivora, the men lit a lantern and went among 
the buffaloes to quieten them, and to see that none had broken 
the ropes tethering them to the stakes. 

The men were absent only a few minutes. When they returned 
to their sleeping-place they found that the girl whom they had 
left asleep was missing. On the blanket on which she had been 
lying were big splashes of blood. 

When daylight came, the father and the uncle followed the 
blood trail. After skirting round the row of tethered buffaloes, it 
went across the narrow field and down the steep hillside for a 
few yards, to where the leopard had eaten his kill. 

'My brother was born under an unlucky star, sahib, for he has 
no son, and he had only this one daughter who was to have 
been married shortly and to whom he looked in the fullness of 
time to provide him with an heir, and now the leopard has come 
and eaten her. 1 

I could go on and on, for there were many kills, and each one 
has its own tragic story, but I think I have said enough to 
convince you that the people of Garhwal had ample reason to 
be terrified of the man-eating leopard of Rudraprayag, 
especially when it is remembered that Garhwalis are intensely 
superstitious and that, added to their fear of physical contact 
with the leopard, was their even greater fear of the 
supernatural, of which I shall give you an example. 

I set out from the small one-roomed Rudraprayag Inspection 
Bungalow one morning just as day was breaking, and as I 
stepped off the veranda I saw in the dust, where the ground 
had been worn away by human feet, the pug-marks of the man- 
eater. 

The pug-marks were perfectly fresh and showed that the 
leopard had stepped out of the veranda only a few minutes in 
advance of me, and from the direction in which they were 
pointing it was evident that the leopard, after his fruitless visit 
to the bungalow, was making for the pilgrim road some fifty 



yards away. 

Tracking between the bungalow and the road was not possible 
owing to the hard surface of the ground, but as I reached the 
gate I saw the pug-marks were heading in the direction of 
Golabrai. A large flock of sheep and goats had gone down the 
road the previous evening, and in the dust they had kicked up 
the leopard's tracks showed up as clearly as they would have 
on fresh-fallen snow. 

I had, by then, become quite familiar with the man-eater's pug- 
marks and could with little difficulty have distinguished them 
from the pug-marks of any hundred leopards. 

A lot can be learnt from the pug-marks of carnivora, as for 
instance the sex, age, and size of the animal. I had examined 
the pug-marks of the man-eater very carefully the first time I 
had seen them, and I knew he was an out-sized male leopard, 
long past his prime. 

As I followed the tracks of the man-eater on this morning I 
could see that he was only a few minutes ahead of me, and that 
he was moving at a slow, even pace. 

The road, which had no traffic on it at this early hour of the 
morning, wound in and out of a number of small ravines, and as 
it was possible that the leopard might on this occasion break 
his rule of never being out after daylight, I crept round each 
corner with the utmost care until I found, a mile farther on, 
where the leopard had left the road and gone up a great track 
into dense scrub and tree jungle. 

A hundred yards from where the leopard left the road there 
was a small field, in the centre of which was a thorn enclosure, 
erected by the owner of the field to encourage packmen to 
camp there and fertilize it. In this enclosure was the flock of 
sheep and goats that had come down the road the previous 
evening. 

The owner of the flock, a rugged fellow who by the looks of him 



had been packing trade commodities up and down the pilgrim 
road for nigh on half a century, was just removing the 
thornbush closing the entrance to the enclosure when I came 
up. In reply to my inquiries be informed me that he had seen 
nothing of the leopard but that, just as dawn was breaking, his 
two sheep-dogs had given tongue and, a few minutes later, a 
kakar had barked in the jungle above the road. 

When I asked the old packman if he would sell me one of his 
goats, he asked for what purpose it was wanted; and when I 
told him it was to tie up for the man-eater, he walked through 
the opening in the fence, replaced the bush, accepted one of 
my cigarettes, and sat down on a rock by the side of the road. 

We remained smoking for a while, with my question still 
unanswered, and then the man began to talk. 

'You, sahib, are undoubtedly he whom I have heard tell of on 
my way down from my village near Badrinath, and it grieves 
me that you should have come all this long way from your home 
on a fruitless errand. The evil spirit that is responsible for all 
the human deaths in this area is not an animal, as you think it 
is, that can be killed by ball or shot, or by any of the other 
means that you have tried and that others have tried before 
you; and in proof of what I say I will tell you a story while I 
smoke this second cigarette. The story was told to me by my 
father, who, as everyone knows, had never been heard to tell a 
lie. 1 

'My father was a young man then, and I unborn, when an evil 
spirit, like the one that is now troubling this land, made its 
appearance in our village, and all said it was a leopard. Men, 
women, and children were killed in their homes and every 
effort was made, as has been made here, to kill the animal. 
Traps were set, and far-famed marksmen sat in trees and fired 
ball and shot at the leopard; and when all these attempts to kill 
it had failed, a great terror seized the people and none dared 
leave the shelter of his home between the hours of sunset and 


sunrise. 



'And then the headmen of my father's village, and of the 
villages round about, bade all the men attend a panchayat, and 
when all were assembled the panch addressed the meeting and 
said they were assembled to devise some fresh means to rid 
themselves of this man-eating leopard. Then an old man, fresh 
back from the burning-ghat, whose grandson had been killed 
the previous night, arose and said it was no leopard that had 
entered his house and killed his grandson as he lay asleep by 
his side, but one from among their own community who, when 
he craved for human flesh and blood, assumed the semblance 
of a leopard, and that such a one could not be killed by the 
methods already tried, as bad been amply proved, and could 
only be killed by fire. His suspicions, he said, fell on the 
fat sadhu who lived in the hut near the ruined temple.' 

'At this there was a great uproar, some exclaiming that the old 
man's sorrow at the loss of his grandson had demented him; 
others averring he was right. And these later recalled that 
the sadhu had arrived at the village at about the time the 
killings had started, and it was further recalled that on the day 
succeeding a killing the sadhu had been wont to sleep all day, 
stretched on his bed in the sun.' 

'When order had been restored the matter was long debated 
and the panchayat eventually decided that no immediate action 
would be taken, but that the sadhu's movements should in 
future be watched. The assembled men were then divided into 
three parties, the first party to start its watch from the night 
the next kill could be expected; for the kills had taken place at 
more or less regular intervals.' 

'During the nights the first and the second parties were on 
watch, the sadhu did not leave his hut.' 

'My father was with the third party, and at nightfall he silently 
took up his position. Soon after, the door of the hut slowly 
opened, and the sadhu emerged and vanished into the night. 
Some hours later an agonized scream came floating down on 
the night air from the direction of a charcoal-burner's hut far 



up the mountain-side, and thereafter there was silence/ 

'No man of my father's party closed an eye that night, and as 
the grey dawn was being born in the east they saw 
the sadhu hurrying home, and his hands and his mouth were 
dripping blood. 1 

'When the sadhu had gone inside his hut and had closed the 
door, the watchers went up to it, and fastened it from the 
outside by passing the chain that was dangling from it over the 
staple in the lintel. Then they went each to his haystack and 
returned with a big bundle of straw, and when the sun rose that 
morning there was nothing but smouldering ash where the hut 
had been. From that day the killing stopped.' 

'Suspicion has not yet fallen on any one of the many sadhus in 
these parts, but when it does the method employed in my 
father's time will be adopted in mine, and until that day comes, 
the people of Garhwal must suffer.' 

'You have asked if I will sell you a goat. I will not sell you a 
goat, sahib, for I have none to spare. But if, after hearing my 
story, you still want an animal to tie up for what you think is a 
man-eating leopard, I will lend you one of my sheep. If it is 
killed you shall pay me its price, and if it is not killed no money 
shall pass between us. Today and tonight I rest here, and 
tomorrow at the rising of the Bhootia star I must be on my way.' 

Near sundown that evening I returned to the thorn enclosure 
and my packman friend very cheerfully let me select from his 
flock a fat sheep which I considered was heavy enough to give 
the leopard two nights' feed. This sheep I tied in the scrub 
jungle close to the path up which the leopard had gone some 
twelve hours earlier. 

Next morning I was up betimes. As I left the bungalow I again 
saw the pug-marks of the man-eater where he had stepped off 
the veranda, and at the gate I found he had come up the road 
from the direction of Golabrai, and, after calling at the 
bungalow, had gone away towards the Rudraprayag bazaar. 



The fact that the leopard was trying to secure a human kill was 
proof that he had no interest in the sheep I had provided for 
him, and I was therefore not surprised to find that he had not 
eaten any portion of the sheep which he had apparently killed 
shortly after I had tied it up. 

'Go back to your home, sahib, and save your time and your 
money,' was the parting advice of the old packman as he 
whistled to his flock, and headed down the road for Hardwar. 

A parallel case, happily without as tragic an ending, occurred a 
few years previously near Rudraprayag. 

Incensed at the killing of their relatives and friends, and 
convinced that a human being was responsible for their deaths, 
an angry crowd of men seized an unfortunate sadhu of Kothgi 
village, Dasjulapatty, but before they were able to wreak their 
vengeance on him Philip Mason, then Deputy Commissioner of 
Garhwal, who was camping in the vicinity, arrived on the scene. 
Seeing the temper of the crowd, and being a man of great 
experience. Mason said he had no doubt that the real culprit 
had been apprehended but that before the sadhu was lynched 
justice demanded that his guilt should be established. To this 
end he suggested that the sadhu should be placed under arrest 
and closely guarded, night and day. To this suggestion the 
crowd agreed, and for seven days and seven nights 
the sadhu was carefully guarded by the police, and as carefully 
watched by the populace. On the eighth morning, when the 
guard and the watchers were being changed, word was 
brought that a house in a village some miles away had been 
broken into the previous night, and a man carried off. 

The populace raised no objection to the sadhu being released 
that day, contenting themselves by saying that on this occasion 
the wrong man had been apprehended, but that next time no 
mistake would be made. 

In Garhwal all kills by man-eaters are attributed to sadhus, and 
in Naini Tal and Almora districts all such kills are attributed to 



the Bokhsars, who dwell in the unhealthy belt of grass at the 
foot of the hills called the Terai, living chiefly on game. 

The sadhus are believed to kill for the lust of human flesh and 
blood, and the Bokhsars are believed to kill for the jewellery 
their victims are wearing, or for other valuables they have on 
their person. More women than men have been killed by man- 
eaters in Naini Tal and Almora districts, but for this there is a 
better reason than the one given. 

I have lived too long in silent places to be imaginative. Even so 
there were times a-many during the months I spent at 
Rudraprayag sitting night after night— on one occasion for 
twenty-eight nights in succession— watching bridges, or cross¬ 
roads, or approaches to villages, or over animal or human kills, 
when I could imagine the man-eater as being a big, light- 
coloured animal— for so he had appeared to me the first time 
that I saw him— with the body of a leopard and the head of a 
fiend. 

A fiend who, while watching me through the long night hours, 
rocked and rolled with silent fiendish laughter at my vain 
attempts to outwit him, and licked his lips in anticipation of the 
time when, finding me off my guard for one brief moment, he 
would get the opportunity he was waiting for, of burying his 
teeth in my throat. 

It may be asked what the Government was doing all the years 
the Rudraprayag man-eater menaced the people of Garhwal. I 
hold no brief for the Government, but after having spent ten 
weeks on the ground, during which time I walked many 
hundreds of miles and visited most of the villages in the 
affected area, I assert that the Government did everything in 
its power to remove the menace. Rewards were offered: the 
local population believed they amounted to ten thousand 
rupees in cash and the gift of two villages, sufficient 
inducement to make each one of the four thousand licensed 
gun-holders of Garhwal a prospective slayer of the man-eater. 
Picked shikaris were employed on liberal wages and were 



promised special rewards if their efforts were successful. More 
than three hundred special gun licences over and above the 
four thousand in force were granted for the specific purpose of 
shooting the man-eater. Men of the Garhwal Regiments 
stationed in Lansdowne were permitted to take their rifles with 
them when going home on leave, or were provided with 
sporting arms by their officers. Appeals were made through the 
press to sportsmen all over India to assist in the destruction of 
the leopard. Scores of traps of the drop-door type, with goats 
as bait, were erected on approaches to villages and on roads 
frequented by the man-eater. Patwaris and other Government 
officials were supplied with poison for the purpose of poisoning 
human kills, and, last but not least. Government servants, often 
at great personal risk, spent all the time they could spare from 
their official duties in pursuit of the man-eater. 

The total results from all these many and combined efforts 
were a slight gunshot wound which creased the pad of the 
leopard's left hind foot and shot away a small piece of skin from 
one of its toes, and an entry in Government records by the 
Deputy Commissioner of Garhwal that, so far from suffering 
any ill effects, the leopard appeared to thrive on, and be 
stimulated by, the poison he absorbed via human kills. 

Three interesting incidents are recorded in a Government 
report and I will summarize them here. 

First: In response to the press appeal to sportsmen, two young 
British officers arrived at Rudraprayag in 1921 with the 
avowed object of shooting the man-eater. What reason they had 
for thinking that the leopard crossed from bank to bank of the 
Alaknanda river by the Rudraprayag suspension bridge I do not 
know; anyway they decided to confine their efforts to this 
bridge and shoot the leopard as it was crossing at night. There 
are towers at each end of the bridge to carry the suspending 
cables, so one of the young sportsmen sat on the tower on the 
left bank of the river, and his companion sat on the tower on 
the right bank. 



After they had been sitting for two months on these towers, the 
man on the left bank saw the leopard walk out on to the bridge 
from the archway below him. Waiting until the leopard had got 
well on to the bridge, he fired, and as it dashes across, the man 
on the tower on the right bank emptied the six chambers of his 
revolver at it. Next morning blood was found on the bridge and 
on the hill up which the leopard had gone, and as it was 
thought that the wound, or wounds, would be fatal, a search 
was kept up for many days. The report goes on to say that for 
six months after it was wounded the leopard did not kill any 
human beings. 

I was told about this incident by men who had heard the seven 
shots, and who had assisted in trying to recover the wounded 
animal. It was thought by the two sportsmen, and also by my 
informants, that the leopard had been hit in the back by the 
first bullet and possibly in the head by some of the subsequent 
bullets, and it was for this reason that a diligent and prolonged 
search had been made for it. From the particulars given me of 
the blood trail I was of opinion that the sportsmen were wrong 
in thinking that they had inflicted a body and head wound on 
the leopard, for the blood trail as described to me could only 
have been made by a foot wound, and I was very gratified to 
find later that my deductions were correct and that the bullet 
fired by the man on the tower on the left bank had only creased 
the pad of the leopard's left hind foot and shot away a portion 
of one of its toes, and that the man on the right bank had 
missed all his shots. 

Second: After some twenty leopards had been caught and killed 
in traps of the drop-door type, a leopard which everyone 
thought was the man-eater was caught in one of these traps; 
and as the Hindu population were unwilling to kill it for fear 
the spirits of the people whom the man-eater had killed would 
torment them, an Indian Christian was sent for. This Christian 
was living in a village thirty miles away, and before he could 
arrive on the scene, the leopard had dug its way out of the trap, 
and escaped. 



Third: After killing a man the leopard lay up with his kill in a 
small isolated patch of jungle. Next morning, when search was 
being made for the victim, the leopard was detected leaving the 
jungle. After a short chase it was seen to enter a cave, the 
mouth of which was promptly closed with thornbushes heaped 
over with big rocks. Every day a growing crowd of men visited 
the spot. On the fifth day, when some five hundred were 
assembled, a man whose name is not given but whom the 
report described as 'a man of influence' came, and, to quote the 
report, 'said scornfully "there is no leopard in this cave" and 
took the thorns off the cave. As he took the thorns up, the 
leopard suddenly rushed out of the cave and made his way 
safely through a crowd of some five hundred persons who had 
gathered there. 1 

These incidents took place shortly after the leopard had 
become a man-eater, and had the leopard been killed on the 
bridge, shot in the trap, or sealed up in the cave, several 
hundred people need not have died, and Garhwal would have 
been saved many years of suffering. 



Arrival 

IT WAS DURING ONE OF the intervals of Gilbert and 
Sullivan's Yeomen of the Guard, which was showing at the 
Chalet Theatre in Naini Tal in 1925, that I first had any definite 
news of the Rudraprayag man-eater. 

I had heard casually that there was a man-eating leopard in 
Garhwal and had read articles in the press about the animal, 
but knowing that there were over four thousand licensed gun- 
holders in Garhwal, and host of keen sportsmen in Lansdowne, 
only some seventy miles from Rudraprayag, I imagined that 
people were falling over each other in their eagerness to shoot 
the leopard and that a stranger under these circumstances 
would not be welcome. 

It was with no little surprise therefore that, as I stood at the 
Chalet bar that night having a drink with a friend, I heard 
Michael Keene— then Chief Secretary to the Government of the 
United Provinces and later Governor of Assam— telling a group 
of men about the man-eater and trying to persuade them to go 
after it. His appeal, judging from the remark of one of the 
group, and endorsed by the others, was not received with any 
enthusiasm. The remark was, 'Go after a man-eater that has 
killed a hundred people? Not on your life!' 

Next morning I paid Michael Keene a visit and got all the 
particulars I wanted. He was not able to tell me exactly where 
the man-eater was operating, and suggested my going to 
Rudraprayag and getting in touch with Ibbotson. On my return 
home I found a letter from Ibbotson on my table. 

Ibbotson— now Sir William Ibbotson, and lately Adviser to the 
Governor of the United Provinces— had very recently been 
posted to Garhwal as Deputy Commissioner, and one of his first 
acts had been to try to rid his district of the man-eater. It was 
in this connection that he had written to me. 

My preparations were soon made, and by travelling via 
Ranikhet, Adbadri, and Karanprayag, I arrived on the evening 



of the tenth day at a road Inspection Bungalow near Nagrasu. 
When leaving Naini Tal I did not know it was necessary to arm 
myself with a permit to occupy this bungalow; and as the 
caretaker had orders not to allow anyone to occupy it unless so 
armed, the six Garhwalis carrying my kit, my servant, and I 
toiled on for another two miles down the Rudraprayag road 
until we found a suitable place on which to camp for the night. 

While my men busied themselves getting water and dry sticks, 
and my servant collected stones for a cooking-place, I picked 
up an axe and went to cut down thornbushes to make an 
enclosure to protect us during the night, for we had been 
warned ten miles farther up the road that we had entered the 
man-eater's territory. 

Shortly after the fires to cook our evening meal had been lit, a 
very agitated call came down to us from a village far up the 
mountain-side, asking us what we were doing out in the open, 
and warning us that if we remained where we were one or 
more of us would surely be killed by the man-eater. When the 
good Samaritan had delivered his warning, to do which he had 
possibly taken a great risk— for it was then dark— Madho 
Singh, whom you have met elsewhere, (see The Chowgarh 
Tigers' in Man-eaters of Kumaon.) expressed the wishes of all 
present when he said, 'We will stay here, sahib, for there is 
sufficient oil in the lantern to keep it alight all night, and yon 
have your rifle. 1 

There was sufficient oil in the lantern to keep it alight all night, 
for I found it burning when I awoke in the morning, and my 
loaded rifle lay across my bed. But the thorn enclosure was 
very flimsy and we were dead tired after our ten days' march, 
and it the leopard had paid us a visit that night he would have 
secured a very easy victim. 

Next day we arrived at Rudraprayag and were given a warm 
welcome by the men whom Ibbotson had instructed to meet us. 



Investigation 

I SHALL NOT ATTEMPT TO GIVE you a day-by-day account of 
my activities during the ten weeks I spent at Rudraprayag, for 
it would be difficult after this lapse of time to write such an 
account and, if written, it would be boring for you to read. I 
shall confine myself to relating a few of my experiences, 
sometimes while alone and at other times in company with 
Ibbotson. But before doing so I should like to give you some 
idea of the country over which the leopard ranged for eight 
years, and in which I hunted him for ten weeks. 

If you were to climb the hill to the east of Rudraprayag you 
would be able to see the greater portion of the five hundred 
square miles of country that the Rudraprayag man-eater 
ranged over. This area is divided into two more or less equal 
parts by the Alaknanda river, which, after passing 
Karanprayag, flows south to Rudraprayag, where it is met by 
the Mandakini coming down from the north-west. The 
triangular bit of country between the two rivers is less steep 
than the country along the left hank of the Alaknanda, and 
there are consequently more villages in the former area than in 
the latter. 

From your elevated position, the cultivated land in the distance 
shows up as a series of lines drawn across the face of the steep 
mountains. 

These lines are terraced fields which vary in width from a yard 
to, in some cases, fifty or more yards. The village buildings, you 
will note, are invariably set at the upper end of the cultivated 
land; this is done with the object of overlooking and protecting 
the cultivation from stray cattle and wild animals, for except in 
very rare cases there are no hedges or fences round the fields. 
The brown and the green patches that make up most of the 
landscape are, respectively, grassland and forests. Some of the 
villages, you will observe, are entirely surrounded by 
grasslands, while others are entirely surrounded by forests. 

The whole country, as you look down on it, is rugged and 



rough, and is cut up by innumerable deep ravines and rock 
cliffs. In this area there are only two roads, one starting from 
Rudraprayag and going up to Kedarnath, and the other the 
main pilgrim road to Badrinath. Both roads, up to the time I am 
writing about, were narrow and rough and had never had a 
wheel of any kind on them. The number of human beings killed 
between 1918 and 1926 is shown on page below. 

It would be reasonable to assume that more human beings 
would have been killed in villages surrounded by forests than 
in villages surrounded by cultivated land. Had the man-eater 
been a tiger this would undoubtedly have been the ease, but to 
a man-eating leopard, which only operates at night, the 
presence or absence of cover makes no difference, and the only 
reason why there were more kills in one village than in another 
was due, in the one case, to lack of precautions, and in the 
other, to the observance of them. 

I have mentioned that the man-eater was an out-sized male 
leopard long past his prime, but though he was old he was 
enormously strong. The ability of carnivora to carry their kills 
to a place where they can feed undisturbed determines, to a 
great extent, the place they choose to do their killing. To the 
Rudraprayag man-eater all places were alike, for he was 
capable of carrying the heaviest of his human victims for 
distances up to— on one occasion that I know of— four miles. 
On the occasion I refer to the leopard killed a fully grown man 
in his own house and carried his victim for two miles up the 
steep slope of a well-wooded hill, and down the far side for 
another two miles through dense scrub jungle. This was done 
for no apparent reason, for the kill had taken place in the early 
hours of the night and the leopard had not been followed up 
until noon of the next day. 

Leopards— other than man-eaters— are the most easily killed 
of all animals in our jungles, for they have no sense of smell. 

More methods are employed in killing leopards than are 
employed in killing any other animal. These methods vary 



according to whether the leopard is being killed for sport, or 
for profit. The most exciting, and the most interesting, method 
of killing leopards for sport is to track them down in the jungles 
and, when they are located, stalk and shoot them. The easiest, 
and the most cruel, method of killing leopards for profit is to 
insert a small and very highly explosive bomb in the flesh of an 
animal which has been killed by a leopard. Many villagers have 
learnt to make these bombs, and when one of them comes in 
contact with the leopard's teeth, it explodes and blows the 
leopard's jaws off. Death is instantaneous in some cases, but 
more often than not the unfortunate animal crawls away to die 
a lingering and very painful death, for the people who use the 
bombs have not the courage to follow the blood trail left by the 
leopard to dispatch it. 

The tracking, locating, and stalking of leopards, besides being 
exciting and interesting, is comparatively easy. For leopards 
have tender pads and keep to footpaths and game tracks as far 
as possible; they are not hard to locate, for practically every 
bird and animal in the jungle assists the hunter; and they are 
easy to stalk, for, though they are blessed with very keen sight 
and hearing, they are handicapped by having no sense of smell. 
The sportsman can therefore select the line of approach that 
best suits him, irrespective of the direction in which the wind is 
blowing. 

Having tracked, located, and stalked a leopard, far more 
pleasure is got from pressing the button of a camera than is 
ever got from pressing the trigger of a rifle. In the one case the 
leopard can be watched for hours, and there is no more 
graceful and interesting animal in the jungles to watch. The 
button of the camera can be pressed as fancy dictates to make 
a record which never loses its interest. In the other case a 
fleeting glimpse, one press of the trigger, and— if the aim has 
been true— the acquisition of a trophy which soon loses both 
its beauty and its interest. 



The First Kill 

SHORTLY BEFORE MY ARRIVAL AT Rudraprayag, Ibbotson 
had organized a beat which if it had been successful would 
have saved the lives of fifteen human beings. The beat, and the 
circumstances leading up to it, are worthy of record. 

Twenty pilgrims toiling up the road to Badrinath arrived 
towards evening at a small roadside shop. After the shopkeeper 
had met their wants he urged them to be on their way, telling 
them there was only just sufficient daylight left for them to 
reach the pilgrim shelters four miles farther up the road, where 
they would get food and safe shelter. The pilgrims were 
unwilling to accept this advice; they said they had done a long 
march that day and were too tired to walk another four miles, 
and that all they wanted were facilities to prepare and cook 
their evening meal, and permission to sleep on the platform 
adjoining the shop. To this proposal the shopkeeper vigorously 
objected. He told the pilgrims that his house was frequently 
visited by the man-eater, and that to sleep out in the open 
would be to court death. 

While the argument was at its height a sadhu on his way from 
Mathura to Badrinath arrived on the scene and championed the 
cause of the pilgrims. He said that if the shopkeeper would give 
shelter to the women of the party he would sleep on the 
platform with the men, and if any leopard— man-eater or 
otherwise— dared to molest them he would take it by the 
mouth and tear it in half. 

To this proposal the shopkeeper had perforce to agree. So 
while the ten women of the party took shelter in the one- 
roomed shop behind a locked door, the ten men lay down in a 
row on the platform, with the sadhu in the middle. 

When the pilgrims on the platform awoke in the morning they 
found the sadhu missing, the blanket on which he had slept 
rumpled, and the sheet he had used to cover himself with 
partly dragged off the platform and spotted with blood. At the 



sound of the men's excited chattering the shopkeeper opened 
the door, and at a glance saw what had happened. When the 
sun had risen, the shopkeeper, accompanied by the men, 
followed the blood trail down the hill and across three terraced 
fields, to a low boundary wall; here, lying across the wall, with 
the lower portion of his body eaten away, they found the sadhu. 

Ibbotson was staying at Rudraprayag at this time, trying to get 
in touch with the man-eater. There had been no kills during his 
stay, so he decided to beat, on spec, a very likely looking bit of 
cover, on the far side of the Alaknanda, which the locals 
suspected was used by the man-eater as a lying-up place 
during the hours of daylight. So while the twenty pilgrims were 
toiling up the road towards the little shop, the patwaris and 
other members of Ibbotson's staff were going round the near¬ 
by villages warning men to be ready for the beat which was to 
take place on the morrow. 

After an early breakfast next morning Ibbotson accompanied by 
his wife and a friend whose name I have forgotten, and 
followed by some members of his staff and two hundred 
beaters, crossed the Alaknanda by the suspension bridge, went 
up the hill on the far side for a mile or so, and took up positions 
for the beat. 

While the beat was still in progress, word was brought by 
runner of the killing of the sadhu. 

The beat, which proved to be a blank, was completed and a 
hurried council held, the upshot of which was that Ibbotson, his 
party, and the two hundred beaters set off up the right bank, to 
cross the river four miles farther up by a swing bridge, to make 
their way back along the left bank to the scene of the kill, while 
the staff dispersed over the countryside to collect as many men 
as possible and assemble them at the shop. 

By late afternoon two thousand beaters and several additional 
guns had gathered, and the high rugged hill above the shop 
was beaten from top to bottom. If you know Ibbotson, there is 



no need for me to tell you that the beat was very efficiently 
organized, and as efficiently carried nut, and the only reason 
why it failed in its object was that the leopard was not in that 
area. 

When a leopard, or a tiger, leaves of his own accord a kill in the 
open, in an exposed spot, it is an indication that the animal has 
no further interest in the kill. After its feed it invariably 
removes itself to a distance, maybe only two or three miles, or 
in the case of man-eaters, maybe to a distance of ten or more 
miles. So it is quite possible that, while the hill was being 
beaten, the man-eater was peacefully slumbering ten miles 
away. 



Locating the Leopard 

MAN-EATING LEOPARDS ARE OF RARE occurrence, and for 
this reason very little is known about them. 

My own experience of these animals was very limited, 
amounting to no more than a brief encounter with one many 
years previously, and though I suspected that the change-over 
from animal to human-and-animal diet would affect the habits 
of a leopard as much as it does those of a tiger, I did not know 
to what extent a leopard's habits would change, and meanwhile 
I decided to try to kill the man-eater by the methods usually 
employed for killing leopards. 

The most common method of killing leopards is to sit up for 
them, either over a kill or over live bait in the form of a goat or 
a sheep. To carry out either one of these methods it is 
necessary in the one case to find a kill, and in the other to 
locate the quarry. 

My object in going to Rudraprayag was to try to prevent 
further loss of human life, and I had no intention of waiting for 
another human kill to occur over which I could sit, therefore 
the obvious thing to do was to locate the man-eater and shoot it 
over live bait. 

Here a formidable difficulty, which I hoped in time partly to 
overcome, presented itself. From the maps I had been supplied 
with I found that the man-eater was operating over an area of 
roughly five hundred square miles. Five hundred square miles 
of country anywhere would have been a considerable area in 
which to find and shoot any animal, and in this mountainous 
and rugged part of Garhwal the task of finding an animal that 
only operated at night appeared, at first glance, to be well-nigh 
impossible— until I took the Alaknanda river, which divided the 
area into two more or less equal parts, into consideration. 

It was generally believed that the Alaknanda offered no 
obstacle to the man-eater and that when he found it difficult to 
obtain a human kill on one bank, he crossed over to the other 



bank, by swimming the river. 

I discounted this belief. No leopard in my opinion would under 
any circumstances voluntarily commit itself to the swift- 
flowing, ice-cold waters of the Alaknanda, and I was convinced 
that when the man-eater crossed from one bank to the other he 
did so by one of the suspension bridges. 

There were two suspension bridges in the area, one at 
Rudraprayag, and the other about twelve miles farther up the 
river, at Chatwapipal. Between these two bridges there was a 
swing bridge— the one by which Ibbotson, his party, and the 
two hundred men had crossed the river on the day of the beat. 
This swing bridge, which no animal excepting a rat could 
possibly have crossed, was the most fear-compelling structure 
of its kind that I have ever seen. The two hand-twisted grass 
cables, blackened by age and mouldy from the mists rising 
from the river, spanned some two hundred feet of foaming 
white water which, a hundred yards farther down, surged with 
a roar like thunder between two walls of rock, where 
a kakar, driven by wild dogs, is credited with having leapt 
across the Alaknanda. Between the cables, and forming the 
footway, were odd bits of sticks an inch and a half to two inches 
in diameter set about two feet apart and loosely tied to the 
cables with wisps of grass. To add to the difficulty in crossing 
this cobweb structure, one of the cables had sagged, with the 
result that the sticks on which one had to place one's feet were 
at an angle of forty-five degrees. The first time I met this 
fearsome jhula I was foolish enough to ask the toll-collector, 
who for the payment of one pice permitted me to risk my life on 
it, whether the bridge was ever tested or repaired. His answer, 
given as he ran a speculative eye over me, that the bridge was 
never tested or repaired but was replaced when it broke under 
the weight of someone who was trying to cross it, gave me a 
cold feeling down my spine, a feeling that remained with me 
long after I had got safely to the other side. 

This jhula being beyond the powers of the man-eater to cross. 



there remained the two suspension bridges, and I felt sure that 
if I could close them against the leopard I should be able to 
confine him to one side of the Alaknanda, and so reduce by half 
the area in which to look for him. 

The first thing therefore was to try to find out on which bank of 
the river the leopard was. The last kill, of the sadhu, had taken 
place on the left bank of the river a few miles from the 
Chatwapipal suspension bridge, and I felt sure that the leopard 
had crossed this bridge, after abandoning his kill, for no matter 
what precautions the locals and the pilgrims may have taken 
before a kill, their precautions were redoubled immediately 
after one, and made it almost impossible for the leopard to 
secure consecutive kills in the same area. Looking at the map 
you will ask why, if this was so, as many as six kills have been 
shown against a single village. I can only answer that an effort 
cannot be sustained indefinitely. The houses are small and 
without conveniences or means of sanitation, and it would not 
be surprising if, hearing the man-eater was operating in a 
village ten, fifteen, or twenty miles away, some man, woman, or 
child should, at the urgent dictate of nature, open a door for a 
brief minute and so give the leopard the chance for which he 
had perhaps been waiting many nights. 



The Second Kill 

NO PHOTOGRAPHS OR OTHER MEANS by which I could 
identify the man-eater by his pug-marks were available, so, 
until I had been given an opportunity of acquiring this 
information for myself, I decided to treat all leopards in the 
vicinity of Rudraprayag as suspect, and to shoot any that gave 
me a chance. 

The day I arrived at Rudraprayag, I purchased two goats. One 
of these I tied up the following evening a mile along the pilgrim 
road; the other I took across the Alaknanda and tied up on a 
path running through some heavy scrub jungle where I found 
the old pug-marks of a big male leopard. On visiting the goats 
the following morning I found the one across the river had 
been killed and a small portion of it eaten. The goat had 
unquestionably been killed by a leopard, but had been eaten by 
a small animal, possibly a pine-marten. 

Having received on news about the man-eater during the day, I 
decided to sit up over the goat, and at 3 p.m. took up my 
position in the branches of a small tree about fifty yards from 
the kill. During the three hours I sat in the tree I had no 
indication, from either animals or birds, that the leopard was 
anywhere in the vicinity, and as dusk was falling I slipped off 
the tree, cut the cord tethering the goat— which the leopard 
had made no attempt to break the previous night— and set off 
for the bungalow. 

I have already admitted that I had very little previous 
experience of man-eating leopards, but I had met a few man- 
eating tigers, and from the time I left the tree until I reached 
the bungalow I took every precaution to guard against a 
sudden attack; and it was fortunate that I did so. 

I made an early start next morning, and near the gate of the 
bungalow I picked up the tracks of a big male leopard. These 
tracks I followed back to a densely wooded ravine which 
crossed the path close to where the goat was lying. The goat 



had not been touched during the night. 

The leopard that had followed me could only have been the 
man-eater, and for the rest of the day I walked as many miles 
as my legs would carry me, telling all the people in the villages 
I visited, and all whom I met on the roads, that the man-eater 
was on our side of the river, and warning them to be careful. 

Nothing happened that day, but next day, just as I was finishing 
breakfast after a long morning spent in prospecting the jungles 
beyond Golabrai, a very agitated man dashed into the 
bungalow to tell me that a woman had been killed by the man- 
eater the previous night in a village on the hill above the 
bungalow— the same hill and almost at the exact spot from 
where you obtained your bird's-eye view of the five hundred 
square miles of country the man-eater was operating over. 

Within a few minutes I collected all the things I needed— a 
spare rifle and a shotgun, cartridges, rope, and a length of 
fishing-line— and set off up the steep hill accompanied by the 
villager and two of my men. It was a sultry day, and though the 
distance was not great— three miles at the most— the climb of 
four thousand feet in the hot sun was very trying and I arrived 
at the village in a bath of sweat. 

The story of the husband of the woman who had been killed 
was soon told. After their evening meal, which had been eaten 
by the light of the fire, the woman collected the metal pots and 
pans that had been used and carried them to the door to wash, 
while the man sat down to have a smoke. On reaching the door 
the woman sat down on the doorstep, and as she did so the 
utensils clattered to the ground. There was not sufficient light 
for the man to see what had happened, and when he received 
no answer to his urgent call he dashed forward and shut and 
barred the door. 'Of what use', he said, 'would it have been for 
me to risk my life in trying to recover a dead body? 1 His logic 
was sound, though heartless; and I gathered that the grief he 
showed was occasioned not so much by the loss of his wife, as 
by the loss of that son and heir whom he had expected to see 



born within the next few days. 

The door, where the woman had been seized, opened on to a 
four-foot-wide lane that ran for fifty yards between two rows of 
houses. On hearing the clatter of the falling pots and pans, 
followed by the urgent call of the man to his wife, every door in 
the lane had been instantaneously shut. The marks on the 
ground showed that the leopard had dragged the unfortunate 
woman the length of the lane, then killed her, and carried her 
down the hill for a hundred yards into a small ravine that 
bordered some terraced fields. Here he ate his meal, and here 
he left the pitiful remains. 

The body lay in the ravine at one end of a narrow terraced 
field, at the other end of which, forty yards away, was a leafless 
and stunted walnut tree in whose branches a hayrick had been 
built, four feet from the ground and six feet tall. In this hayrick 
I decided to sit. 

Starting from near the body, a narrow path ran down into the 
ravine. On this path were the pug-marks of the leopard that 
had killed the woman, and they were identical with the pug 
marks of the leopard that had followed me two nights 
previously from the killed goat to the Rudraprayag bungalow. 
The pug-marks were of an out-sized male leopard long past his 
prime, with a slight defect where a bullet fired four years 
previously had creased the pad of his left hind paw. 

I procured two stout eight-foot bamboos from the village and 
drove them into the ground close to the perpendicular bank 
that divided the field where the body was laying from the field 
below. To these bamboos I fixed my spare rifle and shotgun 
securely, tied lengths of dressed silk fishing-line to the triggers, 
looped the lines back over the trigger-guards, and fastened 
them to two stakes driven into the hillside on the far side of, 
and a little above, the path. If the leopard came along the path 
he had used the previous night there was a reasonable chance 
of his pulling on the lines and shooting himself; on the other 
hand, if he avoided them, or came by any other way, and I fired 



at him while he was on the kill, he would be almost certain to 
run into the trap which lay on his most natural line of retreat. 
Both the leopard, because of its protective colouring, and the 
body, which had been stripped of all clothing, would be 
invisible in the dark; so to give me an idea of the direction in 
which to fire, I took a slab of white rock from the ravine and 
put it on the edge of the field, about a foot from the near side 
of the body 

My ground arrangements completed to my satisfaction, I made 
myself a comfortable seat on the rick, throwing out some of the 
straw, and heaping some behind me and up to my waist in 
front. As I was facing the kill and had my back to the tree, 
there was little chance of the leopard seeing me, no matter at 
what time he came; and that he would come during the night, 
in spite of his reputation of not returning to his kills, I was 
firmly convinced. My clothes were still wet after the stiff climb, 
but a comparatively dry jacket kept out the chill wind; so I 
settled down into my soft and comfortable seat and prepared 
for an all-night vigil. I sent my men away, and told them to 
remain in the headman's house until I came for them, or until 
the sun was well up next morning. (I had stepped from the 
bank on to the rick and there was nothing to prevent the man- 
eater from doing the same.) 

The sun was near setting, and the view of the Ganges valley, 
with the snowy Himalayas in the background showing bluish 
pink under the level rays of the setting sun, was a feast for the 
eyes. Almost before I realized it, daylight had faded out of the 
sky and night had come. 

Darkness, when used in connection with night, is a relative 
term and has no fixed standard; what to one man would be 
pitch dark, to another would be dark, and to a third moderately 
dark. To me, having spent so much of my life in the open, the 
night is never dark, unless the sky is overcast with heavy 
clouds. I do not wish to imply that I can see as well by night as 
by day; but I can see quite well enough to find my way through 



any jungle or, for that matter, over any ground. I had placed the 
white stone near the body only as a precaution, for I hoped that 
the starlight, with the added reflection from the snowy range, 
would give me sufficient light to shoot by 

But my luck was out; for night had hardly fallen when there 
was a flash of lightning, followed by distant thunder, and in a 
few minutes the sky was heavily overcast. Just as the first big 
drops of a deluge began to fall, I heard a stone roll into the 
ravine, and a minute later the loose straw on the ground below 
me was being scratched up. The leopard had arrived; and while 
I sat in torrential rain with the icy-cold wind whistling through 
my wet clothes, he lay dry and snug in the straw below. The 
storm was one of the worst I have ever experienced, and while 
it was at its height, I saw a lantern being carried towards the 
village, and marvelled at the courage of the man who carried it. 
It was not until some hours later that I learnt that the man who 
so gallantly braved both the leopard and the storm had done a 
forced march of over thirty miles from Pauri to bring me the 
electric night-shooting light the Government had promised me; 
the arrival of this light three short hours earlier might . . . But 
regrets are vain, and who can say that the fourteen people who 
died later would have had a longer span of life if the leopard 
had not buried his teeth in their throats? And again, even if the 
light had arrived in time there is no certainty that I should have 
killed the leopard that night. 

The rain was soon over— leaving me chilled to the bone— and 
the clouds were breaking up when the white stone was 
suddenly obscured, and a little later I heard the leopard eating. 
The night before, he had lain in the ravine and eaten from that 
side; so, expecting him to do the same this night, I had placed 
the stone on the near side of the kill. Obviously, the rain had 
formed little pools in the ravine, and to avoid them the leopard 
had taken up a new position and in doing so had obscured my 
mark. This was something I had not foreseen; however, 
knowing the habits of leopards, I knew I should not have to 
wait long before the stone showed up again. Ten minutes later 



the stone was visible, and almost immediately thereafter I 
heard a sound below me and saw the leopard as a light- 
yellowish object disappearing under the rick. His light colour 
could be accounted for by old age, but the sound he made 
when walking I could not then, nor can I now, account for; it 
was like the soft rustle of a woman's silk dress, and could not 
be explained by stubble in the field— for there was none— or 
by the loose straw lying about. 

Waiting a suitable length of time, I raised the rifle and covered 
the stone, intending to fire the moment it was again obscured; 
but there is a limit to the time a heavy rifle can be held to the 
shoulder, and when the limit had been reached I lowered the 
rifle to ease my aching muscles. I had hardly done so when the 
stone for the second time disappeared from view. Three times 
within the next two hours the same thing happened, and in 
desperation, as I heard the leopard approaching the rick for the 
fourth time, I leant over and fired at the indistinct object below 
me. 

The narrow terrace to which I have given the usual name of 
'field' was only about two feet wide at this point, and when I 
examined the ground next morning [ found my bullet-hole in 
the centre of the two-foot-wide space with a little hair, cut from 
the leopard's neck, scattered round it. 

I saw no more of the leopard that night, and at sunrise I 
collected my men and set off down the steep hill to 
Rudraprayag, whilst the husband and his friends carried away 
the woman's remains for cremation. 



Preparations 

MY THOUGHTS AS, COLD AND STIFF, I walked down the hill 
to Rudraprayag from the scene of my night's failure were very 
bitter, for, from whatever angle it was viewed, there was no 
question that the fickle jade chance had played both Garhwal 
and myself a scurvy trick which we did not deserve. 

However little I merit it, the people of our hills credit me with 
supernatural powers where man-eaters are concerned. News 
that I was on my way to try to rid Garhwal of the man-eater had 
preceded me, and while I was still many days' march from 
Rudraprayag the men I met on the roads, and those who from 
their fields or village homes saw me passing, greeted me with a 
faith in the accomplishment of my mission that was as touching 
as it was embarrassing, and which increased in intensity the 
nearer I approached my destination. Had any been there to 
witness my entry into Rudraprayag, he would have found it 
hard to believe that the man whom the populace thronged 
round was no hero returning from the wars, but a man, very 
sensible of his limitations, who greatly feared that the task he 
had undertaken was beyond his powers of accomplishment. 

Five hundred square miles, much of which was clothed with 
dense scrub jungle, and all of which was rugged and 
mountainous, was an enormous area in which to find and shoot 
one particular leopard out of possibly fifty that inhabited it, and 
the more I saw of the grand and beautiful country the less I 
liked it from the viewpoint of the task I had undertaken. The 
populace quite naturally did not share my misgivings, to them I 
was one who had rid others of man-eaters and who had now 
come among them to rid them of the menace they had lived 
under for eight long years. And then, with incredible good luck, 
I had within a few hours of my arrival got the animal I was in 
pursuit of to kill one of my goats and, by staying out a little 
after dark, to follow me to that side of the Alaknanda where I 
believed it would be less difficult to deal with it than it would 
have been on the other side. Following on this initial success 



had been the kill of the unfortunate woman. I had tried to 
prevent the further loss of human life, and had failed, and my 
failure had presented me with an opportunity of shooting the 
leopard which otherwise I might not have got for many months. 

As I had been toiling uphill behind my guide the previous day, I 
had weighed up my chances of killing the leopard and assessed 
them at two-to-one, despite the facts that the animal had in 
recent years earned the reputation of never returning to a kill, 
that it was a dark night, and that I had no aid to night shooting. 
The day I visited Michael Keene and told him I would go to 
Garhwal he had asked me if I had everything I wanted; and 
hearing that I only lacked a night-shooting light and would 
telegraph to Calcutta for one, he said the least the Government 
could do for me was to provide me with a light; and he 
promised to have the best one procurable waiting for me at 
Rudraprayag. 

Though my disappointment was great when I found that the 
light had not arrived, it was mitigated by my ability to see in 
the dark, the ability on which I had assessed my chances at 
two-to-one. So much depended on the success of that night's 
venture, that I had armed myself with a spare rifle and shot 
gun, and when from my concealed position on the hayrick I 
viewed the scene— the short range at which I should get my 
shot, and the perfectly camouflaged gun-trap into which the 
leopard would of a certainty run if I missed or wounded lum¬ 
my hopes rose high and I put my chances of success at ten-to- 
one. Then had come the storm. With visibility reduced to 
practically nil, and without the electric light, I had failed, and 
my failure would in a few hours be known throughout the 
stricken area. 

Exercise, warm water, and food have a wonderfully soothing 
effect on bitter thoughts, and by the time I had picked my way 
down the steep hillside, had a hot bath, and breakfast, I had 
ceased to rail at fate and was able to take a more reasonable 
view of my night's failure. Regret over a bullet fired into the 



ground was as profitless as regret over milk spilt on sand, and 
provided the leopard had not crossed the Alaknanda my 
chances of killing it had improved, for I now had the electric 
shooting light which the runner had braved both the leopard 
and the storm to bring me. 

The first thing to do was to find out if the leopard had crossed 
the Alaknanda, and as I was firm in my conviction that the only 
way it could do this was by way of the suspension bridges, I set 
out after breakfast to glean this information. I discounted the 
possibility of the leopard having crossed the Chatwapipal 
bridge, for no matter how great the shock he had received by 
the discharge of my heavy rifle a few feet from his head, it was 
not possible that he would have covered the fourteen miles that 
separated the kill from the bridge in the few hours that 
remained between the firing of my shot and daylight, so I 
decided to confine my search to the Rudraprayag bridge. 

There were three approaches to the bridge; one from the north, 
one from the south, and between these two a well-beaten 
footpath from the Rudraprayag bazaar. After examining these 
approaches very carefully I crossed the bridge and examined 
the Kedarnath pilgrim road for half a mile, and then the 
footpath on which three nights previously my goat had been 
killed. Satisfied that the leopard had not crossed the river, I 
determined to put in operation my plan for closing the two 
bridges at night and thus confining the leopard to my side of 
the river. The plan was a simple one and, given the co¬ 
operation of the caretakers of the bridges, both of whom lived 
on the left bank and close to the bridge abutments, was certain 
of success. 

To close the only means of communication between the two 
banks of the river over a stretch of some thirty miles would 
appear to be a very high-handed proceeding, but actually it was 
not so, for no human being dared to use the bridges between 
sunset and sunrise owing to the curfew imposed by the 
leopard. 



The bridges were closed by wedging thornbushes in the four- 
foot-wide archway in the towers carrying the steel cables from 
which the plank footway was suspended, and during the whole 
period that the bridges were closed with thorn, or were 
guarded by me, no human being demanded passage across 
them. 

I spent in all some twenty nights on the tower on the left bank 
of the Rudraprayag bridge, and those nights will never be 
forgotten. The tower was built out on a projecting rock and was 
twenty feet high, and the platform on the top of it, which had 
been worn smooth by the wind, was about four feet wide and 
eight feet long. There were two means of reaching this 
platform, one by swarming along the cables, which ran through 
holes near the top of the tower and were anchored in the 
hillside some fifty feet from the tower, and the other by 
climbing up a very rickety bamboo ladder. I chose the latter 
way, for the cables were coated over with some black and very 
evil-smelling matter which clung to one's hands and 
permanently stained one's clothes. 

The ladder— two uneven lengths of bamboo connected with 
thin sticks loosely held in position with string— only reached to 
within four feet of the platform. Standing on the top rung of the 
ladder and dependent for a handhold on the friction of the 
palms of my hands on the smooth masonry, the safe gaining of 
the platform was an acrobatic feat that had less appeal the 
oftener it was tried. 

All the rivers in this part of the Himalayas flow from north to 
south, and in the valleys through which they flow blows a wind 
which changes direction with the rising and the setting of the 
sun. During daylight hours the wind— locally called dadu— 
blows from the south, and during the hours of night it blows 
from the north. 

At the time when I used to take up my position on the platform 
there was usually a lull in the wind, but shortly thereafter it 
started blowing as a light zephyr gaining in strength as 



daylight faded, and amounting by midnight to a raging gale. 
There was no handhold on the platform and even when lying 
flat on my stomach to increase friction and reduce wind- 
pressure, there was imminent risk of being blown off on to the 
rocks sixty feet below, off which one would have bounced into 
the ice-cold Alaknanda— not that the temperature of the water 
would have been of any interest after a fall of sixty feet on to 
sharp and jagged rocks. Strangely enough, whenever I felt in 
fear of falling it was always the water, and never the rocks, that 
I thought of. Added to the discomfort of the wind, I suffered 
torment from a multitude of small ants, which entered my 
clothes and ate away patches of skin. During the twenty nights 
I guarded the bridge, the thornbushes were not placed in 
position; and in all that long period the bridge was only crossed 
by one living thing— a jackal. 



Magic 

EACH EVENING WHEN I WENT TO the bridge I was 
accompanied by two men who carried the ladder that enabled 
me to climb to the platform, and which they removed after 
handing me my rifle. 

On the second day as we arrived at the bridge, we saw a man 
dressed in flowing white robes with something glinting on his 
head and breast. He carried a six-foot silver cross, and was 
approaching the bridge from the direction of Kedarnath. On 
reaching the bridge the man knelt down and, holding the cross 
in front of him, bowed his head. After remaining in this position 
for a little while he raised the cross high, rose to his feet, took 
a few steps forward, and again knelt down and bowed his head. 
This he continued to do at short intervals all the way across the 
long bridge. 

As he passed me the man raised his hand in salutation, but 
since he appeared to be deep in prayer I did not speak to him. 
The glints I had seen on his head-dress and breast were, I 
perceived, silver crosses. 

My men had been as interested in this strange apparition as I 
had been, and watching him climb the steep footpath to the 
Rudraprayag bazaar, they asked me what manner of man he 
was, and from what country he had come. That he was a 
Christian was apparent, and as I had not heard him speak I 
assumed from his long hair, jet-black luxuriant beard, and what 
I could see of his features, that he was a man from Northern 
India. 

The following morning, when with the help of the ladder I had 
climbed down from the tower and was proceeding to the 
Inspection Bungalow, where I passed that portion of the 
daylight hours that I did not spend in visiting near and distant 
villages in search of news of the man-eater, I saw the tall white- 
robed figure standing on a great slab of rock near the road, 
surveying the river. At my approach he left the rock and 



greeted me, and when I asked him what had brought him to 
these parts he said he had come— from a distant land— to free 
the people of Garhwal from the evil spirit that was tormenting 
them. When I asked how he proposed accomplishing this feat, 
he said he would make an effigy of a tiger and after he had, by 
prayer, induced the evil spirit to enter it, he would set the 
effigy afloat on the Ganges and the river would convey it down 
to the sea from where it could not return, and where it would 
do no farther harm to human beings. 

However much I doubted the man's ability to accomplish the 
task he had set himself, I could not help admiring his faith and 
his industry. He arrived each morning before I left the tower, 
and I found him still at work when I returned in the evening, 
labouring with split bamboos, string, paper, and cheap coloured 
cloth on his 'tiger 1 . When the effigy was nearing completion a 
heavy rainstorm one night made the whole structure come 
unstuck, but, nothing daunted, he cheerfully started on it again 
next morning, singing as he worked. 

Came at last the great day when the 'tiger'— about the size of a 
horse, and resembling no known animal— was fashioned to his 
satisfaction. 

Who is there among our hill-folk who does not whole-heartedly 
enjoy taking part in a tamasha? When the effigy, tied to a long 
pole, was carried down a steep path to a small sandy beach, it 
had an escort of over a hundred men, many of whom were 
beating gongs and blowing long trumpets. 

At the river's edge the effigy was unlashed from the pole. The 
white-robed man, with his silver crosses on headgear and 
breast and his six-foot cross in his hands, knelt on the sand, 
and with earnest prayer induced the evil spirit to enter his 
handiwork, and then the effigy, with a crash of gongs and blare 
of trumpets, was consigned to the Ganges, and speeded on its 
way to the sea by a liberal offering of sweets and flowers. 

Next morning the familiar figure was absent from the rock, and 



when I asked some men who were on their way to have an 
early dip in the river where my friend of the flowing robes had 
come from, and where he had gone, they answered, 'Who can 
tell whence a holy man has come, and who dare question 
whither he has departed? 1 

These men with sandalwood-paste caste-marks on their 
foreheads, who spoke of the man as 'holy', and all those others 
who had taken part in the launching ceremony, were Hindus. 

In India, where there are no passports or identity discs, and 
where religion counts for so much— except among those few 
who have crossed the 'black water'— I believe that a man 
wearing a saffron robe, or carrying a beggar's bowl, or with 
silver crosses on his headgear and chest, could walk from the 
Khyber Pass to Cape Comorin without once being questioned 
about his destination, or the object of his journey 



A Near Escape 

WHILE I WAS STILL GUARDING THE bridge, Ibbotson and his 
wife Jean arrived from Pauri, and as the accommodation in the 
Inspection Bungalow was very limited I moved out to make 
room for them, and set up my forty-pound tent on the hill on 
the far side of the pilgrim road. 

A tent afforded little protection against an animal that had left 
his claw-marks on every door and window for miles round, so I 
helped my men to put a thorn fence round the ground we 
intended to camp on. Overhanging this plot of ground was a 
giant prickly-pear-tree, and as its branches interfered with the 
erection of the tent I told the men to cut it down. When the tree 
had been partly cut through I changed my mind, for I saw that I 
should be without shade during the heat of the day, so instead 
of felling the tree I told the men to lop the overhanging 
branches. This tree, which was leaning over the camp at an 
angle of forty-five degrees, was on the far side of the fence. 

There were eight of us in the little camp, and when we had 
eaten our evening meal I wedged a thornbush securely into the 
opening in the fence we had entered by, and as I did so I 
noticed that it would be very easy for the man-eater to climb 
the tree and drop down on our side of the fence. However, it 
was too late then to do anything about it, and if the leopard left 
us alone for that one night, the tree could be cut down and 
removed in the morning. 

I had no tents for my men, and had intended that they should 
sleep with Ibbotson's men in the outbuildings of the Inspection 
Bungalow, but this they had refused to do, asserting that there 
was no more danger for them than there was for me in the 
open tent. My cook— who was, I discovered, a very noisy 
sleeper— was lying next to and about a yard from me, and 
beyond him, packed like sardines in the little enclosure, were 
the six Garhwalis I had brought from Naini Tal. 

The weak spot in our defence was the tree, and I went to sleep 



thinking of it. 

It was a brilliant moonlit night, and round about midnight I was 
suddenly awakened by hearing the leopard climbing the tree. 
Picking up the riffle, which was lying ready loaded on the bed, I 
swung my legs off the bed and had just slipped my feet into my 
slippers— to avoid the thorns which were scattered all round— 
when there was an ominous crack from the partly-cut-through 
tree, followed by a yell from the cook of 'Bagh! Bagh!' In one 
jump I was outside the tent and, swinging round, was just too 
late to get the rifle to bear on the leopard as it sprang up the 
bank on to a terraced field. Pulling the bush out of the gap I 
dashed up to the field which was about forty yards in width and 
bare of crops, and as I stood scanning the hillside dotted over 
with thornbushes and a few big rocks, the alarm call of a jackal 
far up the hill informed me that the leopard had gone beyond 
my reach. 

The cook informed me later that he had been lying on his back 
— a fact of which I had long been aware— and hearing the tree 
crack he had opened his eyes and looked straight into the 
leopard's face just as it was preparing to jump down. 

The tree was cut down next day and the fence strengthened, 
and though we stayed in that camp for several weeks our 
slumbers were not again disturbed. 



The Gin-Trap 

FROM REPORTS RECEIVED FROM NEARBY villages where 
unsuccessful attempts had been made to break into houses, 
and from the pug-marks I had seen on the roads, I knew that 
the man-eater was still in the vicinity and a few days after the 
arrival of the Ibbotsons, news was brought that a cow had been 
killed in a village two miles from Rudraprayag, and about half a 
mile from the village where I had sat on the hayrick in a walnut 
tree. 

Arrived at the village we found that a leopard had broken down 
the door of a one-roomed house and had killed and dragged to 
the door one of the several cows that were in it, and not being 
able to drag it through the door, had left it on the threshold 
after eating a good meal. 

The house was in the heart of the village, and on prospecting 
round, we found that by making a hole in the wall of a house a 
few yards away we could overlook the kill. 

The owner of this house, who was also the owner of the 
dead cow, was only too willing to fall in with our plans, and as 
evening closed in we locked ourselves very securely into the 
room, and after eating our sandwiches and drinking the tea we 
had brought with us, we mounted guard in turns over the hole 
in the wall throughout the long night without either seeing or 
hearing anything of the leopard. 

When we emerged in the morning the villagers took us round 
the village, which was of considerable size, and showed us the 
claw-marks on doors and windows made by the man-eater in 
the course of years, in his attempts to get at the inmates. One 
door in particular had more and deeper claw-marks than any 
other— it was the door the leopard had forced to enter the 
room in which the forty goats and the boy had been secured. A 
day or two later another cow was reported to have been killed 
in a small village on the hill a few hundred yards from the 
bungalow. Here again we found that the cow had been killed 



inside a house, dragged as far as the door, and partly eaten. 
Facing the door, and distant from it about ten yards, was a 
newly built hayrick, sixteen feet tall and built on a wooden 
platform two feet above ground. 

News of the kill was brought to us early in the morning, so we 
had the whole day before us, and the machan we built by 
evening was I am sure not only the most effective, but also the 
most artistic, that has ever been constructed for a similar 
purpose. 

To start with, the rick was dismantled, and a scaffolding of 
poles was set round the platform. With these poles to support 
it, a second, and smaller, platform was built four feet above the 
lower one. Two-inch-mesh wire-netting was then wound round 
the whole structure, leaving only the space bare between the 
lower platform and the ground. Wisps of straw were then 
looped into the meshes of the netting, and a little straw was 
spread round the rick and under the platform, just as it had 
been before we started work. One of the joint owners of the 
hayrick, who had been absent from the village for a day or two 
and who returned just as we had finished our task, would not 
believe that the rick had been disturbed until he felt it all 
round, and had been shown the second rick we had built with 
the spare hay in an adjoining field. 

As the sun was setting we crawled through the hole we had left 
in and entered the machan, securely closing the entrance 
behind us. Ibbotson is a little shorter than me, so he took the 
upper platform, and when we had made ourselves comfortable 
we each made a small hole in the straw to shoot through. As it 
would not be possible for us to communicate with each other 
once the leopard arrived, we agreed that whoever saw it first 
was to fire. It was a bright moonlit night, so there was no need 
for either of us to use the electric light. 

Sounds in the village quietened down after the evening meal 
had been eaten, and at about 10 p.m. I heard the leopard 
coming down the hill behind us. On arriving at the rick it 



paused for a few minutes and then started to crawl under the 
platform I was sitting on. Immediately below me, and with only 
the thickness of a plank between my seat and his head, he 
paused for a long minute and then started to crawl forward; 
and just as I was expecting him to emerge from under the 
platform and give me an easy shot at a range of three or four 
feet, there was a loud creak in the platform above me. The 
leopard dashed out to the right, where I could not see him, and 
went up the hill. The creaking of the planks at the critical 
moment had resulted from Ibbotson changing his position to 
relieve a very painful cramp in both legs. After the fright he 
had got, the leopard abandoned the kill and did not return that 
night, or the next night. 

Two nights later another cow was killed a few hundred yards 
above the Rudraprayag bazaar. 

The owner of this cow lived alone in an isolated house which 
contained only one room, a room which was divided by a rough 
partition made of odd bits of plank into a kitchen and living- 
room. Sometime during the night a noise in the kitchen— the 
door of which he had forgotten to shut— awakened the man, 
and a little later, in the dim moonlight which the open door was 
admitting, he saw the leopard through the wide chinks in the 
partition, trying to tear one of the planks out. 

For a long time the man lay and sweated, while the leopard 
tried plank after plank. Eventually, being unable to find a weak 
place in the partition, the leopard left the kitchen, and killed 
the man's cow; which was tethered in a grass lean-to against 
the side of the house. After killing the cow the leopard broke 
the rope by which it was tethered, dragged it a short distance 
from the lean-to, and left it out in the open after partaking of a 
good meal. 

On the very edge of the hill, and about twenty yards from 
where the dead cow was lying, there was a fair-sized tree, in 
the upper branches of which a hayrick had been built; on this 
natural machan— from which there was a sheer drop of several 



hundred feet into the valley below— Ibbotson and I decided to 
sit. 

To assist in killing the man-eater, the Government a few days 
previously had sent us a gin-trap. This trap, which was five feet 
long and weighed eighty pounds, was the most fearsome thing 
of its kind I have ever seen. Its jaws, armed with sharp teeth 
three inches long, had a spread of twenty-four inches, and were 
actuated by two powerful springs, which needed two men to 
compress. 

When leaving the kill the leopard had followed a footpath 
across a field about forty yards wide, up a three-foot bank, and 
across another field bordered by a densely scrub-covered hill. 
At this three-foot step from the upper to the lower field, we set 
the trap, and to ensure the leopard stepping on to it we planted 
a few thorn twigs on either side of the path. To one of the trap 
was attached a short length of half-inch-thick chain, 
terminating in a ring three inches in diameter; through this 
ring we drove a stout peg, chaining the trap to the ground. 

When these arrangements had been completed, Jean Ibbotson 
returned to the bungalow with our men, and Ibbotson and I 
climbed up to the hayrick. After tying a stick in front of us and 
looping a little hay over it, to act as a screen, we made 
ourselves comfortable, and waited for the leopard, which we 
felt sure would not escape us on this occasion. 

As evening closed in heavy clouds spread over the sky, and as 
the moon was not due to rise until 9 p.m., we had of necessity 
to depend on the electric light for the accuracy of our shooting 
until then. This light was a heavy and cumbersome affair, and 
as Ibbotson insisted on my taking the shot, I attached it to my 
riffle with some little difficulty. 

An hour after dark a succession of angry roars apprised us of 
the fact that the leopard was in the trap. Switching on the 
electric light, I saw the leopard rearing up with the trap 
dangling from his forelegs, and taking a hurried shot, my -450 



bullet struck a link in the chain and severed it. 


Freed from the peg the leopard went along the field in a series 
of great leaps, carrying the trap in front of him, followed up by 
the bullet from my left barrel, and two lethal bullets from 
Ibbotson's shot gun, all of which missed him. In trying to reload 
my rifle I displaced some part of the light, after which it 
refused to function. 

Hearing the roars of the leopard and our four shots, the people 
in Rudraprayag bazaar, and in nearby villages, swarmed out of 
their houses carrying lanterns and pinetorches, and converged 
from all sides on the isolated house. Shouting to them to keep 
clear was of no avail, for they were making so much noise that 
they could not hear us; so while I climbed down the tree, taking 
my rifle with me— a hazardous proceeding in the dark— 
Ibbotson lit and pumped up the petrol lamp we had taken into 
the machan with us. Letting the lamp down to me on the end of 
a length of rope, Ibbotson joined me on the ground, and 
together we went in the direction the leopard had taken. 
Halfway along the field there was a hump caused by an outcrop 
of rock; this hump we approached, with Ibbotson holding the 
heavy lamp high above his head, while I walked by his side with 
rifle to shoulder. Beyond the hump was a little depression, and 
crouching down in this depression and facing us and growling, 
was the leopard. Within a few minutes of my bullet crashing 
into his head, we were surrounded by an excited crowd, who 
literally danced with joy round their long-dreaded enemy. 

The animal that lay dead before me was an out-sized male 
leopard, who the previous night had tried to tear down a 
partition to get at a human being, and who had been shot in an 
area in which dozens of human beings had been killed, all good 
and sufficient reasons for assuming that he was the man-eater. 
But I could not make myself believe that he was the same 
animal I had seen the night I sat over the body of the woman. 
True, it had been a dark night and I had only vaguely seen the 
outline of the leopard; even so, I was convinced that the animal 



that was now being lashed to a pole by willing hands was not 
the man-eater. 

With the Ibbotsons leading the way followed by the men 
carrying the leopard and a crowd of several hundred men, we 
set off via the bazaar for the bungalow. 

As I stumbled down the hill in the wake of the procession— the 
only one in all that throng who did not believe that the man- 
eating leopard of Rudraprayag was dead— my thoughts went 
back to an occurrence that had taken place not far from our 
winter home when I was a small boy and which I saw 
recounted many years later in a book entitled Brave Deeds, or 
perhaps it was Bravest Deeds. The occurrence concerned two 
men: Smeaton of the Indian Civil Service and Braidwood of the 
Forest Department. One dark stormy night, in pre-railway days, 
these two men were travelling in a dak-gharry from Moradabad 
to Kaladhungi, and on going round a bend in the road they ran 
into a rogue elephant. In killing the driver and the two horses, 
the elephant overturned the gharry. Braidwood had a rifle, and 
while he got it out of its case, put it together, and loaded it, 
Smeaton climbed on to the gharry and released the one 
unbroken lamp from its socket. Then Smeaton, holding the oil 
lamp which only gave a glimmer of light over his head, 
advanced up to the elephant and shone the light on his 
forehead, to enable Braidwood to get in a killing shot. 
Admittedly there was a great difference between a rogue 
elephant and a leopard; even so, there are few who would care 
to walk up to a pain-maddened leopard— which we later found 
had practically torn its paw free and was only held by a thin 
strip of skin— holding a lamp above his head and depending for 
safety on a companion's bullet. 

For the first night in many years every house in the bazaar was 
open, with women and children standing in the doorways. 
Progress was slow, for every few yards the leopard was put 
down to let the children cluster round and get a better view of 
it. At the farther end of the long street our escort left us, and 



the leopard was carried in triumph to the Bungalow by our 
men. 

Returning to the bungalow after a wash at my camp, the 
Ibbotsons and I, both during and long after it, put forward our 
arguments for and against the dead leopard being the man- 
eater. Eventually, without either side convincing the other, we 
decided that as Ibbotson had to get back to his work at Pauri, 
and I was tired out after my long stay at Rudraprayag, we 
would spend the next day in skinning the leopard and drying 
the skin, and on the day after would break camp and make for 
Pauri. 

From early morning to late evening relays of men kept coming 
in from near and distant villages to see the leopard, and as 
most of these men asserted that they recognized the animal as 
the man-eater, the conviction of the Ibbotsons, that they were 
right and I was wrong, grew. Two concessions at my request 
Ibbotson made: he added his warning to the people to mind, 
not to relax precautions against the man-eater, and he 
refrained from telegraphing to tell the Government that we had 
shot the man-eater. 

We went early to bed that night, for we were to start at 
daybreak next morning. I was up while it was still dark and was 
having chota hazri when I heard voices on the road. As this was 
very unusual, I called out to ask what men were doing on the 
road at that hour. On seeing me, four men climbed up the path 
to my camp, and informed me they had been sent by 
the patwari to tell me that a woman had been killed by the 
man-eater on the far side of the river, about a mile from the 
Chatwapipal bridge. 



The Hunters Hunted 

IBBOTSON WAS JUST UNBOLTING THE door to admit his man 
with early tea when I arrived, and after he had countermanded 
his move to Pauri we sat on Jean's bed with a large-scale map 
between us, drinking tea and discussing our plans. 

Ibbotson's work at his headquarters at Pauri was pressing, and 
at most he could only spare two more days and nights. I had 
telegraphed to Naini Tal the previous day to say I was 
returning home via Pauri and Kotdwara; this telegram I 
decided to cancel, and instead of going by rail, I would return 
on foot the way I had come. These details settled, and the 
village where the woman had been killed found on the map, I 
returned to camp to tell my men of our change of plans, and to 
instruct them to pack up and follow us, accompanied by the 
four men who had brought news of the kill. 

Jean was to remain at Rudraprayag, so after breakfast Ibbotson 
and I set off on two of his horses, a Gulf Arab and an English 
mare, two of the most surefooted animals I have ever had the 
good fortune to ride. 

We took our rifles, a blue-flame stove, a petrol-lamp, and some 
provisions with us, and were accompanied by one of Ibbotson's 
syces on a borrowed horse, carrying food for our horses. 

We left the horses at the Chatwapipal bridge. This bridge had 
not been closed the night we shot the leopard, with the result 
that the man-eater had got across the river and secured a kill 
at the first village he visited. 

A guide was waiting for us at the bridge, and he took us up a 
very steep ridge and along a grassy hillside, and then down 
into a deep and densely wooded ravine with a small stream 
flowing through it. Here we found the patwari and some twenty 
men guarding the kill. 

The kill was a very robust and fair girl, some eighteen or 
twenty years of age. She was lying on her face with her hands 



by her sides. Every vestige of clothing had been stripped from 
her, and she had been licked by the leopard from the soles of 
her feet to her neck, in which were four great teeth-marks; only 
a few pounds of flesh had been eaten from the upper portion of 
her body, and a few pounds from the lower portion. 

The drums we had heard as we came up the hill were being 
beaten by the men who were guarding the kill, and as it was 
then about 2 p.m. and there was no chance of the leopard 
being anywhere in the vicinity, we went up to the village to 
brew ourselves some tea, taking the patwari and the guard 
with us. 

After tea we went and had a look at the house where the girl 
had been killed. It was a stone-built house, consisting of one 
room, situated in the midst of terraced fields some two or three 
acres in extent, and it was occupied by the girl, her husband, 
and their six-month-old child. 

Two days previous to the kill, the husband had gone to Pauri to 
give evidence in a land dispute case, and had left his father in 
charge of the house. On the night of the kill, after the girl and 
her father-in-law had partaken of their evening meal and it was 
getting near time to retire for the night, the girl, who had been 
nursing her child, handed it over to her father-in-law, unlatched 
the door, and stepped outside to squat down— I have already 
mentioned that there are no sanitary conveniences in the 
houses of our hill-folk. 

When the child was transferred from the mother to the 
grandfather, it started crying, so even if there had been any 
sound from outside— and I am sure there was none— he would 
not have heard it. It was a dark night. After waiting for a few 
minutes the man called to the girl; and receiving no answer he 
called again. Then he got up and hurriedly closed and latched 
the door. 

Rain had fallen earlier in the evening and it was easy to 
reconstruct the scene. Shortly after the rain had stopped, the 



leopard, coming from the direction of the village, had crouched 
down behind a rock in the field, about thirty yards to the left 
front of the door. Here it had lain for some time— possibly 
listening to the man and the girl talking. When the girl opened 
the door she squatted down on its right-hand side, partly 
turning her back on the leopard, who had crept round the far 
side of the rock, covered the twenty yards separating him from 
the comer of the house with belly to ground and, creeping 
along close to the wall of the house, had caught the girl from 
behind, and dragged her to the rock. Here, when the girl was 
dead, or possibly when the man called out in alarm, the leopard 
had picked her up and, holding her high, so that no mark of 
hand or foot showed on the soft newly ploughed ground, had 
carried her across one field, down a three-foot bank, and across 
another field which ended in a twelve-foot drop on to a well- 
used footpath. Down this drop the leopard had sprung with the 
girl— who weighed about eleven stone— in his mouth, and 
some idea of his strength will be realized from the fact that 
when he landed on the footpath he did not let any portion of 
her body come in contact with the ground. 

Crossing the footpath he had gone straight down the hill for 
half a mile, to the spot where he had undressed the girl. After 
eating a little of her, he had left her lying in a little glade of 
emerald-green grass, under the shade of a tree roofed over 
with dense creepers. 

At about four o'clock we went down to sit over the kill, taking 
the petrol-lamp and night-shooting light with us. 

It was reasonable to assume that the leopard had heard the 
noise the villagers made when searching for the girl, and later 
when guarding the body, and that if it returned to the kill it 
would do so with great caution; so we decided not to sit near 
the kill, and selected a tree about sixty yards away on the hill 
overlooking the glade. 

This tree, a stunted oak, was growing out of the hill at almost a 
right angle, and after we had hidden the petrol-lamp in a little 



hollow and covered it over with pine-needles, Ibbotson took his 
seat in a fork of the tree from where he had a clear view of the 
kill, while I sat on the trunk with my back to him and facing the 
hill; Ibbotson was to take the shot, while I saw to our safety As 
the shooting light was not functioning— possibly because the 
battery had faded out— our plan was to sit up as long as 
Ibbotson could see to shoot and then, with the help of the 
petrol-lamp, get back to the village where we hoped to find that 
our men had arrived from Rudraprayag. 

We had not had time to prospect the ground, but the villagers 
had informed us that there was heavy jungle to the east of the 
kill, to which they felt sure the leopard had retired when they 
drove it off. If the leopard came from this direction, Ibbotson 
would see it long before it got to the glade and would get an 
easy shot, for his rifle was fitted with a telescopic sight which 
not only made for accurate shooting, but which also gave us an 
extra half-hour, as we had found from tests. When a minute of 
daylight more or less may make the difference between success 
and failure, this modification of the light factor is very 
important. 

The sun was setting behind the high hills to the west, and we 
had been in shadow for some minutes when a kakar dashed 
down the hill, barking, from the direction in which we had been 
told there was heavy jungle. On the shoulder of the hill the 
animal pulled up, and after barking in one spot for some time 
went away on the far side, and the sound dies away in the 
distance. 

The kakar had undoubtedly been alarmed by a leopard, and 
though it was quite possible that there were other leopards in 
that area, my hopes had been raised, and when I looked round 
at Ibbotson I saw that he too was keyed up, and that he had 
both hands on his rifle. 

Light was beginning to fade, but was good enough to shoot by 
even without the aid of the telescopic sight, when a pine-cone 
dislodged from behind some low bushes thirty yards above us 



came rolling down the hill and struck the tree close to my feet. 
The leopard had arrived and, possibly suspecting danger, had 
taken a line that would enable him to prospect, from a safe 
place on the hill all the ground in the vicinity of his kill. 
Unfortunately, in so doing he had got our tree in a direct line 
with the kill, and though I, who was showing no outline, might 
escape observation, he would be certain to see Ibbotson, who 
was sitting in a fork of the tree. 

When sufficient light for me to shoot by had long since gone, 
and Ibbotson's telescopic sight was no longer of any use to him, 
we heard the leopard coming stealthily down towards the tree. 
It was then time to take action, so I asked Ibbotson to take my 
place, while I retrieved the lamp. This lamp was of German 
make and was called a petromax. It gave a brilliant light but, 
with its long body and longer handle, was not designed to be 
used as a lantern in a jungle. 

I am a little taller than Ibbotson, and suggested that I should 
carry the lamp, but Ibbotson said he could manage all right, 
and, moreover, that he would rather depend on my rifle than 
his own. So we set off, Ibbotson leading and I following with 
both hands on my rifle. 

Fifty yards from the tree, while climbing over a rock, Ibbotson 
slipped, the base of the lamp came in violent contact with the 
rock, and the mantle fell in dust to the bottom of the lamp. The 
streak of blue flame directed from the nozzle on to the petrol 
reservoir gave sufficient light for us to see where to put our 
feet, but the question was how long we should have even this 
much light. Ibbotson was of the opinion that he could carry the 
lamp for three minutes before it burst. Three minutes, in which 
to do a stiff climb of half a mile, over ground on which it was 
necessary to change direction every few steps to avoid huge 
rocks and thornbushes, and possibly followed— and actually 
followed as we found later— by a man-eater, was a terrifying 
prospect. 

There are events in one's life which, no matter how remote. 



never fade from memory; the climb up that hill in the dark was 
for me one of them. When we eventually reached the footpath 
our troubles were not ended, for the path was a series of 
buffalo wallows, and we did not know where our men were. 
Alternately slipping on wet ground and stumbling over unseen 
rocks, we at last came to some stone steps which took off from 
the path and went up to the right. Climbing these steps we 
found a small courtyard, on the far side of which was a door. 

We had heard the gurgling of a hookah as we came up the 
steps, so I kicked the door and shouted to the inmates to open. 
As no answer came, I took out a box of matches and shook it, 
crying that if the door was not opened in a minute I would set 
the thatch alight. On this an agitated voice came from inside 
the house, begging me not to set the house on fire, and saying 
that the door was being opened— a minute later first the inner 
door and then the outer door were opened, and in two strides 
Ibbotson and I were in the house, slamming the inner door, and 
putting our backs to it. 

There were some twelve or fourteen men, women, and children 
of all ages in the room. When the men had regained their wits 
after the unceremonious entry, they begged us to forgive them 
for not having opened the doors sooner, adding that they and 
their families had lived so long in terror of the man-eater that 
their courage had gone. Not knowing what form the man-eater 
might take, they suspected every sound they heard at night. In 
their fear they had our full sympathy, for from the time 
Ibbotson had slipped and broken the mantle, and a few minutes 
later had extinguished the red-hot lamp to prevent it bursting, I 
had been convinced that one, and possibly both, of us would 
not live to reach the village. 

We were told that our men had arrived about sundown, and 
that they had been housed in a block of buildings farther along 
the hill. The two able-bodied men in the room offered to show 
us the way, but as we knew it would be murder to let them 
return to their homes alone, we declined their offer— which 
had been made with the full realization of the risk it would 



entail— and asked if they could provide us with a light of some 
kind. After rummaging about in a corner of the room, an old 
and decrepit lantern with a cracked globe was produced, and 
when vigorous shaking had revealed that it contained a few 
drops of oil, it was lit, and with the combined good wishes of 
the inmates we left the house— the two doors being shut and 
bolted on our heels. 

More buffalo wallows and more sunken rocks, but with the 
glimmer of light to help us we made good progress and, finding 
the second lot of steps we had been instructed to climb, we 
mounted them and found ourselves in a long courtyard facing a 
row of double-storied buildings extending to the right and to 
the left, every door of which was fast shut, and not a glimmer 
of light showing anywhere. 

When we called a door was opened, and by climbing a short 
flight of stone steps we gained the veranda of the upper story, 
and found the two adjoining rooms which had been placed at 
the disposal of our men and ourselves. While the men were 
relieving us of the lamp and our rifles, a dog arrived from 
nowhere. He was just a friendly village pye, and after sniffing 
round our legs and wagging his tail, he went towards the steps 
up which we had just come. The next second, with a scream of 
fear followed by hysterical barking, he backed towards us with 
all his hair on end. 

The lantern we had been lent had died on us as we reached the 
courtyard, but our men had procured its twin brother. Though 
Ibbotson held it at all angles while I hurriedly reloaded my 
rifle, he could not get its light to illuminate the ground eight 
feet below. 

By watching the dog it was possible to follow the movements of 
the leopard. When the leopard had crossed the yard and gone 
down the steps leading to the footpath, the dog gradually 
stopped barking and lay down intently watching in that 
direction, and growling at intervals. 



The room that had been vacated for us had no windows, and as 
the only way in which we could have occupied it in safety 
would have been by closing the solid door, and excluding all air 
and light, we decided to spend the night on the veranda. The 
dog evidently belonged to the late occupant of the room and 
had been accustomed to sleeping there, for he lay contentedly 
at our feet and gave us a feeling of safety as we watched in 
turn through the long hours of the night. 



Retreat 

AT DAYBREAK NEXT MORNING WE very carefully stalked the 
kill, and were disappointed to find that the leopard had not 
returned to it, which we felt sure he would do after his failure 
to bag one of us the previous evening. 

During the day while Ibbotson dealt with some office work that 
had been sent out to him, I took a rifle and went off to see if I 
could get a shot at the leopard. Tracking on the hard and pine- 
needle-covered ground was not possible, so I made for the 
shoulder of the hill beyond which the villagers had told us 
there was heavy jungle. Here I found the ground very difficult 
to negotiate, for, in addition to dense scrub jungle through 
which it was not possible to penetrate, there was a series of 
rock cliffs on which it was impossible for a human being to find 
foothold. In this area there was a surprisingly large herd of 
game, and on the paths that intersected it I found the tracks 
of kakar, ghooral, pig, and a solitary sarao. Of the leopard— 
except for a few old scratch-marks— I found no trace. 

The gin-trap that had been sent off from Rudraprayag the 
previous day arrived while we were having lunch, and in the 
early evening we took it down to the glade and, after setting it, 
poisoned the kill with cyanide. I had no experience of poisons, 
nor had Ibbotson, but in a conversation with a doctor friend 
before leaving Naini Tal I had mentioned that Government 
wanted me to try every means to kill the man-eater, and that 
there was little use in my trying poison, as the records showed 
that the leopard throve on it. I told him what poisons had 
hitherto been tried, and he then recommended my using 
cyanide, which was the best poison for the cat family. I had 
passed this information on to Ibbotson, and a few days 
previously a supply had arrived, with capsules with which to 
use it. We inserted a few of these capsules in the kill at the 
places where the leopard had eaten. 

There was every hope of the leopard returning to the kill this 
second night, and as he had seen us on the tree the previous 



evening we decided not to sit up, but to leave him to the gin- 
trap and to the poison. 

In a big pine-tree near the footpath we built a machan, which 
we padded with hay and on which we took up our position after 
we had eaten the dinner which Ibbotson cooked on the blue- 
flame stove. Here on the comfortable machan we were able to 
lie at full stretch and talk and smoke, for our only reason for 
being there was to listen for sounds from the direction of the 
kill. We watched and slept by turns, hoping to hear the angry 
roar of the leopard if by accident it walked into the trap, for 
here there was no well-used track along which to direct the 
leopard to it. 

Once during the night a kakar barked, but in the opposite 
direction to that from which we expected the leopard to come. 

At the first streak of dawn we climbed out of the tree and, after 
brewing ourselves a cup of tea, visited the kill, which we found 
lying just as we had left it. 

Ibbotson left for Rudraprayag after an early breakfast, and I 
was packing my things and having a final word with the 
villagers before starting on my fifteen-day journey back to 
Naini Tal when a party of men arrived to give the news that a 
cow had been killed by a leopard in a village four miles away. 
They suspected that the cow had been killed by the man-eater, 
for the previous night— the night the leopard had followed 
Ibbotson and myself from the tree to the veranda— and 
towards the small hours of the morning, the leopard had made 
a determined attempt to break down the door of the headman's 
house; late the following evening, the cow had been killed in 
the jungle three hundred yards from this house. At the urgent 
request of these men I postponed my departure to Naini Tal 
and accompanied them back to their village, taking the gin-trap 
and a supply of poison with me. 

The headman's house was on a little knoll surrounded by 
cultivated land, and was approached by a footpath which for a 



short distance ran over soft and boggy ground; here I found the 
pug-marks of the man-eater. 

The headman had seen me approaching across the valley and 
had a steaming dish of tea brewed in fresh milk and sweetened 
with jaggery waiting for me. While I drank this rich and over¬ 
sweetened liquid on the courtyard, sitting on a reed couch 
upholstered with ghooral skins, he drew my attention to the 
condition of the door which two nights previously the leopard 
had attempted to break down, in which attempt it would 
undoubtedly have succeeded if he had not fortunately had 
some sawn timber in the house— intended for repairing the 
roof— which he had used to shore up the door from inside. 

The headman was old and crippled with rheumatism, so he sent 
his son to show me the kill while he made room in the house for 
myself and my men. 

I found the kill— a young cow in grand condition— lying on a 
flat bit of ground just above the cattle track, in an ideal 
position for setting up the gin-trap. Its back was against a 
tangle of wild rose-bushes, and its hooves were against a foot- 
high bank; while eating, the leopard had sat on the bank with 
its forepaws between the cow's legs. 

Having dug away the ground between the cow's legs and 
removed it to a distance, I set the trap where the leopard had 
placed his paws and covered it over with big green leaves. 

Then, after sprinkling on a layer of earth, I replaced the dead 
leaves, bits of dry sticks, and splinters of bone in the exact 
position between the cow's legs in which I had found them. Not 
one of a hundred human beings going to the kill would have 
noticed that the ground had in any way been disturbed, and a 
deadly trap set. 

My arrangements made to my satisfaction I retraced my steps 
arid climbed a tree half-way between the kill and the 
headman's house, where I would he handy if needed at the 
trap. 



Near sundown a pair of kalege pheasants and their brood of 
five chicks, which I had been watching for some time, suddenly 
took alarm and went scuttling down the hill, and a few seconds 
later a kakar came dashing towards me and after barking 
under my tree for a little while, went off up the hill on tiptoe. 
Nothing happened after that, and when it was getting too dark 
under the shade of the trees for me to see the sights of my rifle, 
I slipped off the tree and myself tiptoed away on rubber-shod 
feet towards the village. 

A hundred yards from the headman's house the track ran 
across an open glade, some thirty yards long and twenty yards 
wide. On the upper, hill side of the glade was a big rock. As I 
reached this open ground I felt I was being followed, and, 
determined to exploit the situation, I left the track and, taking 
two long steps over soft and spongy ground, lay down behind 
the rock, with only one eye showing in the direction of the kill. 

For ten minutes I lay on the wet ground. When daylight had all 
but gone I regained the path and, taking every precaution, 
covered the remaining distance to the headman's house. 

Once during the night the headman roused me from a sound 
sleep to tell me he had heard the leopard scratching on the 
door, and when I opened the door next morning I saw the pug- 
marks of the man-eater in the dust in front of it. These pug- 
marks I followed back to the glade, and found that the leopard 
had done just what I had done the previous evening. He had 
left the track where I had; had crossed the soft ground to the 
rock and, after regaining the track, had followed me to the 
house, round which he had walked several times. 

On leaving the house the leopard had gone back along the 
track, and as I followed his pug-marks towards the kill my 
hopes rose high, for up to that time I had not fully realized the 
degree of cunning that a man-eating leopard can acquire after 
eight years of close association with human beings. 

I left the track and approached from the high ground, and from 



a little distance away saw that the kill had gone, and that the 
ground where the trap had been buried was, except for two 
pug-marks, undisturbed. 

Sitting on the foot-high bank, as he had done the first night, the 
leopard had put both front paws between the cow's legs, but on 
this occasion he had spread them wide apart and rested them 
on the buried levers of the trap which, released, would have 
closed the great jaws. Here, safe from the trap, he had eaten 
his meal, and when he had done, he skirted round the flat 
ground and, getting hold of the cow by the head, had dragged 
it through the rose-thorns and rolled it down the hill, where 
fifty yards lower down it had fetched up against an oak sapling. 
Content with his night's work, the leopard had then gone along 
the cattle track, and after following him for a mile I lost his 
tracks on hard ground. 

There was no hope of the leopard returning to the kill. 

However, to salve my conscience for not having done so the 
previous night, I put a liberal dose of cyanide in the carcass of 
the cow. Truth to tell I hated the very thought of using poison 
then, and I hate it no less now. 

I visited the kill in the morning and found that a leopard had 
eaten all that portion of the cow that I had poisoned. So sure 
was I that the poison had been eaten by a leopard that had 
accidentally come across the kill, and not by the man-eater, 
that on my return to the village I told the headman that I would 
not stay to recover the leopard, though I would pay a hundred 
rupees to anyone who found it and took its skin to 
the patwari.A month later the reward was claimed, and the skin 
of a leopard which had been dead many days was buried by 
the patwari. 

It did not take my men long to pack up, and shortly after mid¬ 
day we started on our long journey back to Naini Tal. As we 
went down a narrow footpath to the Chatwapipal bridge a big 
rat snake leisurely crossed the path, and as I stood and 
watched it slip away Madho Singh, who was behind me, said. 



'There goes the evil spirit that has been responsible for your 
failure. 1 


My action in leaving Garhwal to the tender mercies of the man- 
eater may appear heartless to you— it did so to me— and was 
adversely criticized in the press, for the leopard at that time 
was daily mentioned in the Indian papers. In extenuation I 
would urge that an effort entailing great strain cannot be 
indefinitely sustained. There were twenty-four hours in every 
day of the many weeks I spent in Garhwal, and time and time 
again after sitting up all night, I walked endless miles next day, 
visiting distant villages from which reports had come of 
unsuccessful attacks by the man-eater. On many moonlit nights, 
when sitting in an uncomfortable position physical endurance 
had reached its limit, and when sitting where it would have 
been easy for the leopard to have got at me I had no longer 
been able to keep my eyes open. I had for hours walked the 
roads which were alone open to me and to the leopard, trying 
every trick I knew of to outwit my adversary, and the man-eater 
had, with luck beyond his deserts or with devilish cunning, 
avoided the bullet that a press of my finger would have sent 
into him, for on retracing my steps in the morning after these 
night excursions I had found from the pug-marks on the road 
that I was right in assuming I had been closely followed. To 
know that one is being followed at night— no matter how 
bright the moon may be— by a man-eater intent on securing a 
victim, gives one an inferiority complex that is very unnerving, 
and that is not mitigated by repetition. 

Tired out in mind and in body, my longer stay at Rudraprayag 
would not have profited the people of Garhwal, and it might 
have cost me my own life. Knowing that the temporary 
abandonment of my self-imposed task would be severely 
criticized by the press, but that what I was now doing was 
right, I plodded on towards my distant home, having assured 
the people of Garhwal that I would return to help them as soon 
as it was possible for me to do so. 



Fishing Interlude 

I LEFT THE SCENE OF MY failure, weary and dispirited, in the 
late autumn of 1925, and returned to continue my labour, 
refreshed and full of hope, in the early spring of 1926. 

On this my second visit to Garhwal in pursuit of the man-eater, 

I travelled by train to Kotdwara and went from there by foot to 
Pauri, thus saving eight days on the journey At Pauri, Ibbotson 
joined me and accompanied me to Rudraprayag. 

During my three months' absence from Garhwal the man-eater 
had killed ten human beings, and during these three months no 
attempt had been made by the terror-stricken inhabitants to 
kill the leopard. 

The last of these ten kills— the victim was a small boy— had 
taken place on the left bank of the Alaknanda, two days before 
our arrival at Rudraprayag. We had received telegraphic news 
of this kill at Pauri, and though we had travelled as fast as it 
was possible for us to do, we were disappointed to learn from 
the patwari, who was awaiting our arrival at the Inspection 
Bungalow, that the leopard disposed of the entire kill the 
previous night, leaving nothing of its small victim over which 
we could sit. 

The boy had been killed at midnight in a village four miles from 
Rudraprayag, and as it was unlikely that the leopard had 
crossed the river after his undisturbed feed, we took steps 
immediately on our arrival to close the two suspension bridges. 

During the winter Ibbotson had organized a very efficient 
intelligence service throughout the area in which the man-eater 
was operating. If in this area a dog, goat, cow, or human being 
was killed, or an attempt made to force open a door, news of 
the occurrence was conveyed to us by the service, and in this 
way we were able to keep in constant touch with the man-eater. 
Hundreds of false rumours of alleged attacks by the man-eater 
were brought to us, entailing endless miles of walking, but this 
was only to be expected, for in an area in which an established 



man-eater is operating everyone suspects their own shadows, 
and every sound heard at night is attributed to the man-eater. 

One of these rumours concerned a man by the name of Galtu, a 
resident of Kunda, a village seven miles from Rudraprayag on 
the right bank of the Alaknanda. Galtu left the village in the 
evening to spend the night in his cattle shed a mile away from 
the village, and when his son went to the shed next morning he 
found his father's blanket half in and half out of the door of the 
shed, and in a patch of soft ground nearby he found what he 
thought was drag mark, and near it the pug-marks of the man- 
eater. Returning to the village he raised an alarm, and while 
sixty men went off to search for the body, four men were 
dispatched to Rudraprayag to inform us. Ibbotson and I were 
beating a hillside on the left bank of the river for the man-eater 
when the men arrived, and as I was convinced that the leopard 
was on our side of the river, and that there was no truth in the 
rumour that Galtu had been killed, Ibbotson sent 
a patwari back to Kunda with the four men, with instructions to 
make a personal search and report back to us. Next evening we 
received the patwari's report, with a sketch of the pug-marks in 
the soft earth near the door of the shed. The report stated that 
an all-day search of the surrounding country, with two hundred 
men, had not resulted in finding Galtu's remains, and that the 
search would be continued. The sketch showed six circles, the 
inner one as large as a plate, with five equally spaced circles 
round it, each the size of a tea cup; all the circles had been 
made with a compass. Five days later, and just as Ibbotson and 
I were setting out to sit up on the tower of the bridge, a 
procession came up to the bungalow led by an irate man who 
was protesting loudly that he had committed no offence that 
justified his being arrested and brought to Rudraprayag. The 
irate man was Galtu. After we had pacified him, he gave us his 
story. It appeared that just as he was leaving his house on the 
night he was alleged to have been carried off by the man-eater, 
his son arrived and informed him that he had paid Rs 100 for a 
pair of bullocks which Galtu asserted were not worth more 



than Rs 70. The wanton waste of good money had so angered 
him that, after sleeping the night in the cattle shed, he had got 
up early next morning and gone to a village ten miles away, 
where a married daughter of his was living. On his return to his 
village that morning, he had been arrested by the patwari, and 
he wanted to know what crime he had committed that justified 
his arrest. It was some little time before he saw the humour of 
the situation, but once having done so, he laughed as heartily 
as any of the assembled throng at the thought of an important 
person like a patwari, and two hundred of his friends, 
searching for five days for his remains, what time he was 
cooling off in a village ten miles away. 

Ibbotson was averse to lying all night on the wind-swept tower 
of the Rudraprayag suspension bridge, and as wood and 
carpenters were available, he had a platform built in the arch 
of the tower, and on this platform we sat for the five nights 
Ibbotson was able to spend at Rudraprayag. 

After Ibbotson's departure the leopard killed one dog, four 
goats, and two cows. The dog and goats had been eaten out on 
the nights on which they had been killed, but I sat over each of 
the cows for two nights. On the second night on which I was 
sitting up over the first cow, the leopard came, but just as I was 
raising my rifle and preparing to switch on the torch I had 
provided myself with, a woman in the house adjoining the one I 
was sitting in, thumped on the door preparatory to opening it, 
and unfortunately frightened the leopard away. 

No human beings had been killed during this period, but a 
woman and her baby had been badly mauled. The leopard had 
forced open the door of the room in which she was sleeping 
with her baby, and seizing her arm had attempted to drag her 
out of the room. The woman fortunately was stout of heart, and 
had not fainted or lost her wits, and after the leopard- 
dragging her along the floor— had backed out of the room, she 
shut the door on it, and escaped with a badly lacerated arm 
and several deep wounds on her breast, while the baby escaped 



with one head wound. I sat in this room for the following two 
nights, but the leopard did not return. 

I was returning one day towards the latter end of March, after 
visiting a village on the Kedarnath pilgrim route, when, as I 
approached a spot where the road runs close alongside the 
Mandakini river, and where there is a water fall ten to twelve 
feet high, I saw a number of men sitting on the rock at the head 
of the fall on the far side of the river, armed with a triangular 
net attached to a long bamboo pole. The roar of the water 
prevented conversation, so leaving the road I sat down on the 
rocks on my side of the fall, to have a rest and a smoke— for I 
had walked for that day— and to see what the men were doing. 

Presently one of the men got to his feet, and as he pointed 
down excitedly into the foaming white water at the foot of the 
fall, two of his companions manning the long pole held the 
triangular net close to the fall. A large shoal of mahseer fish, 
varying in size from five to fifty pounds, were attempting to 
leap the fall. One of these fish, about ten pounds in weight, 
leapt clear of the fall and when falling back was expertly 
caught in the net. After the fish had been extracted and placed 
in a basket, the net was again held out close to the fall. I 
watched the sport for about an hour, during which time the 
men caught four fish, all about the same size— ten pounds. 

On my previous visit to Rudraprayag I had been informed by 
the chowkidar in charge of the Inspection Bungalow that there 
was good fishing in the spring— before the snow-water came 
down— in both the Alaknanda and Mandakini rivers, so I had 
come armed on this my second visit with a fourteen-foot split 
cane salmon rod, a silex reel with two hundred and fifty yards 
of line, a few stout traces, and an assortment of home-made 
brass spoons varying in size from one to two inches. 

The following morning— as no news had come in of the man- 
eater— I set off for the waterfall with my rod and tackle. 

No fish were leaping the fall as they had been doing the 



previous day; and the men on the far side of the river were 
sitting in a group round a small fire smoking a hookah which 
was passing from hand to hand. They watched me with 
interest. 

Below the waterfall was a pool thirty to forty yards wide, 
flanked on both sides by a wall of rock, and about two hundred 
yards long, one hundred yards of which was visible from where 
I stood at the head of the pool. The water in this beautiful and 
imposing pool was crystal-clear. 

The rock face at the head of the pool rose sheer up out of the 
water to a height of twelve feet, and after keeping at this 
height for twenty yards, sloped gradually upwards to a height 
of a hundred feet. It was not possible to get down to water level 
anywhere on my side of the pool, nor would it be possible, or 
profitable, to follow a fish— assuming that I hooked one— 
along the bank, for at the top of the high ground there were 
trees and bushes, and at the tail of the pool the river cascaded 
down in a foaming torrent to its junction with the Alaknanda. 

To land a fish in this pool would be a difficult and a hazardous 
task, but the crossing of that bridge could be deferred until the 
fish had been hooked— and I had not yet put together my rod. 

On my side of the pool the water— shot through with millions 
of small bubbles— was deep, and from about half-way across a 
shingle bottom was showing, over which four to six feet of 
water was flowing. Above this shingle bottom, every stone and 
pebble of which was visible in the clear water, a number of fish, 
ranging in size from three to ten pounds, were slowly moving 
upstream. 

As I watched these fish, standing on the rocks twelve feet 
above the water with a two-inch spoon mounted with a single 
strong treble hook in my hand, a flight of fingerlings flashed 
out of the deep water and went skimming over the shingle 
bottom, hotly pursued by three big mahseer. Using the good 
salmon rod as friend Hardy had never intended that it should 
be used— and as it had been used on many previous occasions 



— I slung the spoon out, and in my eagerness over-estimated 
the distance, with the result that the spoon struck the rock on 
the far side of the pool, about two feet above the water. The 
falling of the spoon into the water coincided with the arrival of 
the fingerlings at the rock, and the spoon had hardly touched 
the water, when it was taken by the leading mahseer. 

Striking with a long line from an elevated position entails a 
very heavy strain, but my good rod stood the strain, and the 
strong treble hook was firmly fixed in the mahseer's mouth. For 
a moment or two the fish did not appear to realize what had 
happened as, standing perpendicularly in the water with his 
white belly towards me, he shook his head from side to side, 
and then, possibly frightened by the dangling spoon striking 
against his head, he gave a mighty splash and went tearing 
downstream, scattering in all directions the smaller fish that 
were lying on the shingle bottom. 

In his first run the mahseer ripped a hundred yards of line off 
the reel, and after a moment's check carried on for another 
fifty yards. There was plenty of line still on the reel, but the fish 
had now gone round the bend and was getting dangerously 
near the tail of the pool. Alternately easing and tightening the 
strain on the line, I eventually succeeded in turning his head 
upstream, and having done so, very gently pulled him round 
the bend, into the hundred yards of water I was overlooking. 

Just below me a projection of rock had formed a backwater, and 
into this backwater the fish, after half an hour's game fight, 
permitted himself to be drawn. 

I had now very definitely reached my bridge and had just 
regretfully decided that, as there was no way of crossing it, the 
fish would have to be cut adrift, when a shadow fell across the 
rock beside me. Peering over the rock into the backwater, the 
new arrival remarked that it was a very big fish, and in the 
same breath asked what I was going to do about it. When I told 
him that it would not be possible to draw the fish up the face of 
the rock, and that therefore the only thing to do was to cut it 



free, he said, 'Wait, sahib, I will fetch my brother/ His brother 
— a long and lanky stripling with dancing eyes— had quite 
evidently been cleaning out a cow shed when summoned, so 
telling him to go upstream and wash himself lest he should slip 
on the smooth rock, I held council with the elder man. 

Starting from where we were standing, a crack, a few inches 
wide, ran irregularly down the face of the rock, ending a foot 
above the water in a ledge some six inches wide. The plan we 
finally agreed on was that the stripling— who presently 
returned with his arms and legs glistening with water— should 
go down to the ledge, while the elder brother went down the 
crack far enough to get hold of the stripling's left hand, while I 
lay on the rock holding the elder brother's other hand. Before 
embarking on the plan I asked the brothers whether they knew 
how to handle a fish and whether they could swim, and 
received the laughing answer that they had handled fish and 
swum in the river from childhood. 

The snag in the plan was that I could not hold the rod and at 
the same time make a link in the chain. However, some risk had 
to be taken, so I put the rod down and held the line in my hand, 
and when the brothers had taken up position I sprawled on the 
rock and, reaching down, got hold of the elder brother's hand. 
Then very gently I drew the fish towards the rock, holding the 
line alternately with my left hand and with my teeth. There was 
no question that the stripling knew how to handle a fish, for 
before the fish had touched the rock, he had inserted his thumb 
into one side of the gills and his fingers into the other, getting a 
firm grip on the fish's throat. Up to this point the fish had been 
quite amenable, but on having its throat seized, it lashed out, 
and for seconds it appeared that the three of us would go 
headlong into the river. 

Both brothers were bare-footed, and when I had been relieved 
of the necessity of holding the line and was able to help with 
both hands, they turned and, facing the rock, worked their way 
up with their toes, while I pulled lustily from on top. 



When the fish at last had been safely landed, I asked the 
brothers it they ate fish, and on receiving their eager answer 
that they most certainty did, when they could get any, I told 
them I would give them the fish we had just landed— 
a mahseer in grand condition weighing a little over thirty 
pounds— if they would help me to land another fish for my 
men. To this they very readily agreed. 

The treble had bitten deep into the leathery underlip of 
the mahseer, and as I cut it out, the brothers watched 
interestedly. When the hook was free, they asked if they might 
have a look at it. Three hooks in one, such a thing had never 
been seen in their village. The bit of bent brass of course acted 
as a sinker. With what were the hooks baited? Why should fish 
want to eat brass? And was it really brass, or some kind of 
hardened bait? When the spoon, and the trace with its three 
swivels, had been commented on and marvelled at, I made the 
brothers sit down and watch while I set about catching the 
second fish. 

The biggest fish in the pool were at the foot of the fall, but here 
in the foaming white water, in addition to mahseer were some 
very big goonch, a fish that takes a spoon of dead bait very 
readily, and which is responsible for 90 per cent of the tackle 
lost in our hill rivers through its annoying habit of diving to the 
bottom of the pool when hooked and getting its head under a 
rock from where it is always difficult, and often impossible, to 
dislodge it. 

No better spot than the place from where I had made my first 
cast was available, so here I again took up my position, with 
rod in hand and spoon held ready for casting. 

The fish on the shingle bottom had been disturbed while I was 
playing the mahseer and by our subsequent movements on the 
face of the rock but were now beginning to return, and 
presently an exclamation from the brothers, and an excited 
pointing of fingers, drew my attention to a big fish downstream 
where the shingle bottom ended and the deep water began. 



Before I was able to make a cast, the fish turned and 
disappeared in the deep water, but a little later it reappeared, 
and as it came into the shallow water I made a cast, but owing 
to the line being wet the cast fell short. The second cast was 
beautifully placed and beautifully timed, the spoon striking the 
water exactly where I wanted it to. Waiting for a second to give 
the spoon time to sink, I started to wind in the line, giving the 
spoon just the right amount of spin, and as I drew it along in 
little jerks, the mahseer shot forward, and next moment, with 
the hook firmly fixed in his mouth, jumped clean out of the 
water, fell back with a great splash, and went madly 
downstream, much to the excitement of the spectators, for the 
men on the far bank had been watching the proceedings as 
intently as the brothers. 

As the reel spun round and the line paid out, the brothers— 
now standing one on either side of me— urged me not to let the 
fish go down the run at the trail of the pool. Easier said than 
done, for it is not possible to stop the first mad rush of 
a mahseer of any size with risking certain break, or the tearing 
away of the hook-hold. Our luck was in, or else the fish feared 
the run, for when there was less than fifty yards of line on the 
reel he checked, and though he continued to fight gamely he 
was eventually drawn round the bend, and into the little 
backwater at the foot of the rock. 

The landing of this second fish was not as difficult as the 
landing of the first had been, for we each knew our places on 
the rock and exactly what to do. 

Both fish were the same length, but the second was a little 
heavier than the first, and while the elder brother set off in 
triumph for his village with his fish carried over his shoulder- 
threaded on a grass cable he had made— the stripling begged 
to be allowed to accompany me back to the Inspection 
Bungalow, and to carry both my fish and my rod. Having in the 
days of long ago been a boy myself, and having had a brother 
who fished, there was no need for the stripling when making 



his request to have said, 'If you will let me carry both the fish 
and the rod, and will walk a little distance behind me, sahib, all 
the people who see me on the road, and in the bazaar, will 
think that I have caught this great fish, the like of which they 
have never seen. 1 



Death of a Goat 

IBBOTSON RETURNED FROM PAURI ON the last day of 
March, and the following morning, while we were having 
breakfast, we received a report that a leopard had called very 
persistently the previous night near a village to the north-west 
of Rudraprayag, about a mile from the place where we had 
killed the leopard in the gin-trap. 

Half a mile to the north of the village, and on the shoulder of 
the great mountain, there was a considerable area of rough 
and broken ground where there were enormous rocks and 
caves, and deep holes in which the locals said their forefathers 
had quarried copper. Over the whole of this area there was 
scrub jungle, heavy in some places and light in others, 
extending down the hillside to within half a mile of the terraced 
fields above the village. 

I had long suspected that the man-eater used this ground as a 
hideout when he was in the vicinity of Rudraprayag, and I had 
frequently climbed to a commanding position above the broken 
ground in the hope of finding him basking on the rocks in the 
early morning sun, for leopards are very fond of doing this in a 
cold climate, and it is a very common way of shooting them, for 
all that is needed is a little patience, and accuracy of aim. 

After an early lunch Ibbotson and I set out armed with our -275 
rifles, and accompanied by one of Ibbotson's men carrying a 
short length of rope. At the village we purchased a young male 
goat— the leopard having killed all the goats that I had 
purchased from time to time. 

From the village, a rough goat track ran straight up the hill to 
the edge of the broken ground, where it turned left, and after 
running across the face of the hill for a hundred yards carried 
on round the shoulder of the mountain. The track where it ran 
across the hill was bordered on the upper side by scattered 
bushes, and on the steep lower side by short grass. 

Having tied the goat to a peg firmly driven into the ground at 



the bend in the track, about ten yards below the scrub jungle, 
we went down the hill for a hundred and fifty yards to where 
there were some big rocks, behind which we concealed 
ourselves. The goat was one of the best callers I have ever 
heard, and while his shrill and piercing bleat continued there 
was no necessity for us to watch him, for he had been very 
securely tied and there was no possibility of the leopard 
carrying him away 

The sun— a fiery red ball— was a hand's breadth from the 
snow mountains above Kedarnath when we took up our 
position behind the rocks, and half an hour later, when we had 
been in shadow for a few minutes, the goat suddenly stopped 
calling. Creeping to the side of the rock and looking through a 
screen of grass, I saw the goat with ears cocked, looking up 
towards the bushes; as I watched, the goat shook his head, and 
backed to the full length of the rope. 

The leopard had undoubtedly come, attracted by the calling of 
the goat, and that he had not pounced before the goat became 
aware of his presence was proof that he was suspicious. 
Ibbotson's aim would be more accurate than mine, for his rifle 
was fitted with a telescopic sight, so I made room for him, and 
as he lay down and raised his rifle I whispered to him examine 
carefully the bushes in the direction in which the goat was 
looking, for I felt sure that if the goat could see the leopard— 
and all the indications were that it could— Ibbotson should also 
be able to see it through his powerful telescope. For minutes 
Ibbotson kept his eye to the telescope and then shook his head, 
laid down the rifle, and made room for me. 

The goat was standing in exactly the same position in which I 
had last seen it, and taking direction from it I fixed the 
telescope on the same bush at which it was looking. The flicker 
of an eyelid, or the very least movement of ear or even 
whiskers, would have been visible through the telescope, but 
though I also watched for minutes I too could see nothing. 

When I took my eye away from the telescope I noted that the 



light was rapidly fading, and that the goat now showed as a 
red-and-white blur on the hillside. We had a long way to go and 
waiting longer would be both useless and dangerous, so getting 
to my feet I told Ibbotson it was time for us to make a move. 

Going up to the goat— who from the time he had stopped 
bleating had not made a sound— we freed it from the peg, and 
with the man leading it we set off for the village. The goat quite 
evidently had never had a rope round its neck before and 
objected violently to being led, so I told the man to take the 
rope off— my experience being that when a goat is freed after 
having been tied up in the jungle, through fear or for want of 
companionship it follows at heel like a dog. This goat, however, 
had ideas of its own, and no sooner had the man removed the 
rope from its neck, than it turned and ran up the track. 

It was too good a calling goat to abandon— it had attracted the 
leopard once, and might do so again. Moreover, we had only a 
few hours previously paid good money for it, so we in turn ran 
up the track in hot pursuit. At the bend, the goat turned to the 
left, and we lost sight of it. Keeping to the track, as the goat 
had done, we went to the shoulder of the hill where a 
considerable extent of the hill, clothed in short grass, was 
visible, and as the goat was nowhere in sight we decided it had 
taken a short cut back to the village, and started to retrace our 
steps. I was leading, and as we got half-way along the hundred 
yards of track, bordered on the upper side by scattered bushes 
and on the steep lower side by short grass, I saw something 
white on the track in front of me. The light had nearly gone, 
and on cautiously approaching the white object I found it was 
the goat— laid head and tail on the narrow track, in the only 
position in which it could have been laid to prevent it from 
rolling down the steep hillside. 

Blood was oozing from its throat, and when I placed my hand 
on it the muscles were still twitching. 

It was as though the man-eater— for no other leopard would 
have killed the goat and laid it on the track— had said, 'Here, if 



you want your goat so badly take it; and as it is now dark and 
you have a long way to go, we will see which of you lives to 
reach the village . 1 

I do not think all three of us would have reached the village 
alive if I had not, very fortunately, had a full box of matches 
with me (Ibbotson at that time was a non-smoker). Striking a 
match and casting an anxious look all round and taking a few 
hurried steps, and then again striking another match, we 
stumbled down the rough track until we got to within calling 
distance of the village. Then, at our urgent summons, men with 
lanterns and pine torches came up to meet us. 

We had left the goat lying where the leopard had placed it, and 
when I returned at a daybreak next morning I found the pug- 
marks of the man-eater where he had followed us down to the 
village, and I found the goat untouched and lying just as we 
had left it. 



Cyanide Poisoning 

AS I WAS RETURNING TO THE Inspection Bungalow after 
visiting the goat that had been killed the previous night, I was 
informed in the village that my presence was urgently needed 
at Rudraprayag, for news had just been received that the man- 
eater had killed a human being the previous night. My 
informants were unable to give me any particulars as to where 
the kill had taken place, but as the pug-marks of the man-eater 
showed that, after following us to the village, it had gone back 
up the goat track and turned right at the bend, I assumed— 
rightly, as I later found— that the leopard, after failing to bag 
one of us, had secured a victim farther up the mountain-side. 

At the bungalow I found Ibbotson in conversation with a man 
by the name of Nand Ram. Nand Ram's village was about four 
miles from where we had sat the previous evening. Half a mile 
above this village and on the far side of a deep ravine, a man of 
the depressed class, named Gawiya, had cleared a small area of 
forest land and built himself a house in which he lived with his 
mother, wife, and three children. At daybreak that morning, 
Nand Ram had heard the wailing of women from the direction 
of Gawiya's house and, on his shouting out and asking what 
was wrong, he had been informed that 'the man of the house' 
had been carried off by the man-eater half an hour previously. 
With this information Nand Ram had come hot-foot to the 
Inspection Bungalow. 

Ibbotson had had the Arab and the English mare saddled, and 
after we had eaten a good meal we set out, with Nand Ram to 
show us the way. There were no roads on the hill, only goat and 
cattle tracks, and as the big English mare found the hairpin 
bends on these tracks difficult to negotiate we sent the horses 
back and did the rest of the hot and steep climb on foot. 

Arrived at the little isolated clearing in the forest, the two 
distracted women— who appeared to be nursing the hope that 
the 'man of the house' might still be alive— showed us where 
Gawiya had been sitting near the door of the house when the 



leopard had seized him. The leopard had caught the 
unfortunate man by the throat, thus preventing him from 
making any sound, and after dragging him for a hundred yards 
had killed him. Then he had carried him for four hundred yards 
to a little hollow surrounded by dense brushwood. The wailing 
of the women and the shouting of Nand Ram had evidently 
disturbed the leopard at his meal, for he had only eaten the 
throat and jaw, and a small portion of one shoulder and thigh. 

There were no trees within sight of the kill on which we could 
sit, so we poisoned the kill with cyanide at the three places 
where the leopard had eaten, and as it was now getting 
towards evening we took up position on a hill several hundred 
yards away, from where we could over look the hollow in which 
the kill was lying. The leopard was undoubtedly in the dense 
brushwood, but though we lay in our concealed position and 
watched for two hours, we saw nothing of him. At dusk we lit 
the lantern we had provided ourselves with, and went back to 
the bungalow. 

We were up very early next morning, and it was just getting 
light when we again sat down on the hill over-looking the 
hollow. We saw and heard nothing, and when the sun had been 
up an hour, we went to the kill, the leopard had not touched the 
three places where we had buried the poison, but had eaten 
the other shoulder and leg, and had then carried the body away 
for a short distance and hidden it under some bushes. 

Again there were no trees overlooking the kill on which we 
could sit, and after a prolonged discussion we eventually 
decided that while Ibbotson went down the hill for a mile to a 
village where there was a big mango tree, in which he could 
make himself a machan and spend the night, I would sit about 
four hundred yards from the kill, over a village path on which 
the previous day we had seen the pug-marks of the man-eater. 

The tree I selected to sit in was a rhododendron which many 
years previously had been cut about fifteen feet above ground. 
Stout branches had grown out from the cut, and sitting on the 



old stump surrounded by the branches I had a perfect seat and 
perfect concealment. 

Facing me was a steep well-wooded hill with a dense 
undergrowth of bracken and dwarf bamboo. Running across 
the face of the hill east and west was a well-used footpath; the 
rhododendron tree was growing about ten feet below this 
footpath. 

From my seat in the tree I had an uninterrupted view of a 
length of about ten yards of the path, which to my left crossed 
a ravine and carried on at the same level on the far side, and to 
my right, and some three hundred yards farther on, passed a 
little below the bushes where the kill was lying. There was no 
water in the ravine where the path crossed it, but thirty yards 
lower down and immediately below, and three or four yards 
from, the root of my tree, there were several small pools— the 
start of a little spring which lower down became a stream 
providing drinking water to the villagers and irrigation for their 
crops. 

The ten yards of path of which I had an uninterrupted view was 
joined at right-angles by a path coming down the hill from the 
house three hundred yards above me where Gawiya had been 
killed. Thirty yards up this path there was a bend, and from this 
point a small depression ran down to the lower path— the 
points where the depression started on the upper path and 
ended on the lower were not in my view. 

There was no need for a torch, for it was a brilliant moonlit 
night, and if the leopard came along the level path or down the 
path from the house— as its pug-marks showed it had done the 
previous day— I should get an easy shot at a range of from 
twenty to forty feet. 

I had gone down the hill a short distance with Ibbotson, and 
then a little before sunset had taken up my position on the tree. 
A few minutes later three kalege pheasants— a cock and two 
hens— came down the hill, and after drinking at the spring 



went back the way they had come. On both occasions they had 
passed under my tree, and that they had not seen me was proof 
that my hide was a good one. 

The early part of the night was silent, but at eight o'clock 
a kakar started barking in the direction of the kill. The leopard 
had arrived, and I was convinced he had not gone to the kill 
along either of the paths I was watching. After barking for a 
minutes the kakar stopped, and thereafter the night was again 
silent up to ten o'clock, when the kakar again barked. The 
leopard had been at the kill for two hours— sufficient time for 
him to have had a good meal, and for him to have poisoned 
himself several times over. And there was a good chance of his 
having done so, for on this second night the kill had been very 
effectively poisoned, the cyanide having been buried deep in 
the victim's flesh. 

Without closing an eye I sat watching the hill in front of me, 
where the moonlight was so brilliant that I could clearly see 
every blade of grass, and at 2 a.m. I heard the leopard coming 
down the path from the direction of the house. I had scattered 
dry leaves on this path, and also on the lower path, with the 
object of getting some warning of the leopard's approach, and 
that he was now walking carelessly over these leaves, and not 
making any attempt at silence, filled me with hope— though I 
expected within the next few seconds to put a bullet into him— 
that all was not well with him. 

At the bend in the path the leopard made a short pause, and 
then leaving the path entered the little depression and followed 
it down to the lower path, on reaching which he again paused. 

I had sat without movement for hours with my hands on the 
rifle lying across my knees, and as I was convinced that he 
would come along the path, I decided to let him pass in front of 
me, and when there was no longer any danger of his seeing the 
movement raise the rifle to my shoulder, and hit him where I 
wanted to. For seconds I watched the path, expecting to see his 
head appear from behind the screen of branches, and then. 



when tension was becoming unbearable, I heard him jump 
down off the path and come diagonally across the hill towards 
my tree. For a moment I thought he had in some mysterious 
way become aware of my presence on the tree and, not liking 
the flavour of his last kill, was intent on securing another 
human victim. His object, however, in leaving the path was not 
to try to get at me but to take a short cut down to the spring, 
for he passed the foot of the tree without a pause, and next 
second I heard him eagerly and noisily lapping water. 

From the leopard's behaviour on the hill, and from the way he 
was now drinking, I was convinced he had poisoned himself, 
but not having had any previous experience of the effect of 
cyanide, I did not know how long the poison would take to act. 
For ten minutes after the leopard had stopped drinking, and 
just as I was beginning to hope that he had died at the spring, I 
heard him going up the hill on the far side of the ravine, all 
sound ceasing when he regained the path which carried on 
round the shoulder of the hill. 

At no time, either when the leopard was coming down the path, 
coming down the depression, coming across the hill to the foot 
of my tree, when drinking, or going up the hill on the far side of 
the ravine, had I seen him, for either by accident or intent he 
had kept under cover to which not a glint of moonlight had 
penetrated. 

There was now no hope of my getting a shot, but this was not 
of much account if the poison was as potent as the doctor in 
Naini Tal had claimed that it was. 

I sat on for the rest of the night, watching the path and 
listening for sounds. At daylight Ibbotson returned, and while 
we brewed ourselves a very welcome cup of tea I told him of 
the night's happenings. 

On visiting the kill we found that the leopard had eaten the leg 
from which he had taken a small portion two nights previously, 
and in which we had buried a full dose of poison, and that he 



had in addition eaten two other doses of poison, one from the 
left shoulder and the other from the back. 

It was now necessary to make a search for the leopard, and for 
this purpose the patwari, who had returned with Ibbotson, set 
off to collect men. At about midday the patwari returned with 
two hundred men, and with these we made a line and beat the 
whole side of the hill in the direction in which the leopard had 
gone. 

Half a mile from where the leopard had quenched his thirst, 
and in the direct line in which I had heard him going away, 
there were some big rocks at the foot of which there was a 
cave extending far into the hill, with an opening large enough 
to admit a leopard. Near the mouth of this cave the leopard had 
scratched up the ground, and rid himself of his victim's toes— 
which he had swallowed whole. 

Willing hands brought loose stones from the hillside, and when 
we left the cave we had sealed it beyond all possibility of any 
leopard that might be lurking in it escaping. 

Next morning I returned with a roll of one-inch wire-netting 
and a number of iron tent-pegs, and, after removing the stones, 
very effectively wired up the mouth of the cave. Thereafter for 
the following ten days I visited the cave morning and evening, 
and as during this period no news of the man-eater came in 
from any village on the left bank of the Alaknanda, my hopes 
each day grew stronger that on my next visit I would surely get 
some indication that the leopard had died in the cave. 

On the tenth morning, when I returned from my visit to the 
cave— where I had found the netting undisturbed— Ibbotson 
greeted me with the news that a woman had been killed the 
previous night in a village five miles away, and about a mile 
above the Rudraprayag-Badrinath pilgrim road. 

Quite evidently cyanide was not the right poison for an animal 
that had the reputation of thriving on, and being stimulated by, 
arsenic and strychnine. That the leopard had eaten the cyanide 



there could be no doubt whatever, nor was there any doubt that 
he had entered the cave, for his hairs were adhering to the 
rock where his back had come in contact with it when entering 
the cave. 

An overdose might account for the poison not having had the 
desired effect and a second opening somewhere farther up the 
hill might account for his escape from the cave. Even so, it was 
no longer any matter of surprise to me— who had only been 
acquainted with the leopard for a few short months— that the 
people of Garhwal, who had lived in close and intimate 
association with him for eight long years, should credit him— 
animal or spirit— with supernatural powers, and that they 
should cling to the belief that nothing but fire would rid them 
of this evil spirit. 



Touch and Go 

NEWS THAT IS OF IMPORTANCE TO every individual travels 
fast, and during the past ten days everyone in Garhwal had 
heard of the poisoning of the man-eater, and of our hope that 
we had sealed it up in a cave. It was natural therefore for risks 
to have been taken, and quite evidently the leopard, having 
recovered from the effects of the poison and found a way out of 
the cave, had found the first person who was taking a risk. 

We had the day before us, for I had returned early from my visit 
to the cave, and after breakfast, mounted on Ibbotson's 
surefooted horses and carrying our rifles, we set out for the 
village where the woman was reported to have been killed. 

After a fast ride up the pilgrim road we took a track that went 
diagonally across the hill, and a mile along this track, where 
the path from the village joined it, there were signs of a 
struggle and a big pool of blood. 

The headman, and relatives of the victim, were waiting for us 
at the village, and they showed us where the leopard had 
seized the woman as she was in the act of closing the door of 
her house behind her. From this point the leopard had dragged 
the woman along on her back for a hundred yards to the 
junction of the tracks, where he had released his hold, and 
after a violent struggle had killed her. The people in the village 
had heard the woman's screams as she was being dragged 
along the ground and as she was struggling for her life with the 
leopard, but had been too frightened to render any help. 

When the woman was dead, the leopard had picked her up and 
carried her over some waste land, across an open ravine a 
hundred yards wide, and up the hill on the far side for another 
two hundred yards. There were no drag marks, but the blood 
trail was easy to follow, and it led us to a flat bit of ground, four 
feet wide and twenty feet long. On the upper side of this 
narrow strip of ground there was a perpendicular bank eight 
feet high with a stunted medlar-tree growing on it, and on the 



lower side of the narrow strip the hill fell steeply away and 
growing on it was a wild rose-bush, which had reached up and 
smothered the medlar-tree. 

Lying huddled up between the steep bank and the rose-bush, 
with her head against the bank, with every vestige of clothing 
stripped from her, and with her naked body flecked with white 
rose-petals that had fallen from above was the kill— an old 
grey-haired lady, seventy years of age. 

For this pitiful kill leopard would have to pay with his life, and 
after a short council of war, Ibbotson, leading the spare horse, 
returned to Rudraprayag for the things we needed, while I set 
off with my rifle to see whether it was possible to make contact 
with the man-eater in daylight. 

This part of the country was new to me, and the first thing to 
do was to reconnoitre the ground. I had already noted while at 
the village that the hill went steeply up from the ravine to a 
height of four to five thousand feet; that about two thousand 
feet of the top of the hill was clothed with dense oak and pine 
forest, below which was an open stretch of short grass about 
half a mile wide, and that below the grass was scrub jungle. 

Keeping now to the edge of the grass and scrub jungle I went 
round the shoulder of the hill, and found in front of me a wide 
depression, extending for half a mile down to the pilgrim road, 
and evidently caused in the days of long ago by a landslide. 
Beyond this depression, which was about a hundred yards wide 
at the upper end and about three hundred yards wide where it 
met the road, the ground was open. The ground in the 
depression was damp, and growing on this damp ground were 
a number or big trees, and under the tree a dense growth of 
scrub jungle. At the upper end of the depression was a cliff of 
overhanging rock, varying in height from twenty to forty feet, 
and about a hundred yards long; half-way along the cliff was a 
deep cleft a few feet wide, down which a tiny stream was 
trickling. Above the rocks was a narrow belt of scrub jungle, 
and above that again, open grassland. 



I had reconnoitred the ground with care, for I did not want the 
leopard— which I was convinced was lying up in the depression 
— to be aware of my presence before it suited me. It was now 
necessary to find approximately where the leopard was most 
likely to be lying up, and to gain this information I went back to 
the kill. 

We had been told in the village that it had got light shortly after 
the woman had been killed, and as it must have taken the 
leopard some little time to effect the kill, carry his victim four 
hundred yards, and eat a portion of it, it was reasonable to 
assume that he had left the spot where he had hidden the kill 
when day was fully established. 

The hill on which the kill was lying was in full view of the 
village, in which at this hour there must had been considerable 
movement; the leopard therefore on leaving the kill would very 
naturally had kept to cover as far as was possible, and working 
on this assumption, and also because the ground was too hard 
to show pug-marks, I set out to follow him along the line I 
assumed he had taken. 

When I had covered half a mile and was out of view of the 
village and was approaching the depression, I was gratified to 
find that I had followed on the leopard's tracks foot by foot, for 
in the lee of a bush where there was some loose earth, I found 
where he had been lying for several hours. His pug-marks 
when leaving this spot showed that he had entered the 
depression about fifty yards below the cliff of rock. 

For half an hour I lay where the leopard had lain, watching the 
small area of tree and scrub jungle in front of me in the hope 
that the leopard would make some slight movement and give 
away his position. 

After I had been watching for a few minutes a movement 
among the dead leaves attracted my attention, and presently 
two scimitar babblers came into view industriously turning 
over the leaves, looking for grubs. Where carnivores are 



concerned, these birds are among the most reliable informants 
in the jungle, and I hoped later to make use of this pair to help 
in locating the leopard. 

No movement had been visible and no sound had come to 
indicate that the leopard was in the depression; but that he was 
there I was still convinced, and having failed to get a shot in 
one way I decided to try another way 

Without coming out into the open, there were two natural lines 
of retreat for the leopard, one down the hill towards the pilgrim 
road, and the other up the hill. To move him down the hill 
would not profit me, but if I moved him up the hill he would for 
a certainty go up the cleft in the rock cliff to gain the shelter of 
the bushes above the cliff, and while he was doing so, there 
was a reasonable chance of my getting a shot. 

Entering the depression a little below where I thought the 
leopard was, I started to zigzag very slowly across it, gaining a 
few feet in height at each turn. There was as yet no need for 
me to keep an eye on the cleft, for the babblers were on the 
ground a few feet below it, and they would let me know when 
the leopard was on the move. I had gained about forty yards in 
height in my movements forward and backwards across the 
depression and was about ten yards from, and a little to the left 
of the cleft, when the babblers rose in alarm and, flying into a 
small oak tree and hopping about excitedly on the branches, 
started to give their clear and ringing alarm call, which can in 
the hills be heard for a distance of half a mile. Holding the rifle 
ready to take a snap shot, I stood perfectly still for a minute, 
and then started slowly moving forward. 

The ground here was wet and slippery and, with my eyes fixed 
on the cleft, I had only taken two steps when my rubber-soled 
shoes slipped on the wet surface; and while I was endeavouring 
to regain my balance, the leopard sprang up the cleft, and in 
the bushes above put up a covey of kalege pheasants, which 
came sailing down over my head. 



My second attempt had failed, and though it would have been 
quite easy for me to have moved the leopard back to where he 
had started from, it would have been of no use for me to do so, 
for, from above, the cleft in the rock was not visible until one 
was right up to it, and long before I gained the position the 
leopard would have been far down the depression. 

Ibbotson and I had arranged to meet in the open ravine at 2 
p.m., and a little before that hour he returned from 
Rudraprayag, accompanied by several men carrying the things 
he had gone to fetch. These consisted of food, and drink— in 
the way of tea— our old friend the petromax lamp— which on 
this occasion I decided I would carry myself, if the necessity 
arose— two spare rifles and ammunition, my fishing-reel, a 
liberal supply of cyanide, and the gin-trap. 

Sitting in the ravine by a clear stream of water, we had our 
lunch and brewed ourselves cups of tea, and then went over to 
the kill. 

I will give a description of the position of the kill, to enable you 
to follow our movements and the subsequent happenings. 

The kill was lying about five feet from the near or ravine end of 
the flat strip of ground, which was four feet wide and about 
twenty feet long. The upper side of this strip of ground was 
protected by a high bank, and the lower side by a steep drop 
and a spreading rose-bush. The stunted medlar tree on the 
bank was too small to allow a machan being made in it, so we 
decided to depend entirely on a gun-trap, poison, and the gin- 
trap; having come to this decision we set about our 
preparations. 

First we poisoned the kill, of which the leopard had— for want 
of time— only eaten a small portion; hoping that on this 
occasion he would only consume sufficient to poison himself 
effectively. Then, while I bent over the kill in the position we 
anticipated the leopard would assume when eating, Ibbotson 
sighted and securely lashed his -256 Mannlicher— which had a 



hair trigger— and my -450 high-velocity rifle to two saplings, 
fifteen yards on our approach side of the kill. 

There were no insuperable obstacles to the leopard getting at 
the kill from any side he might wish to, but his most natural 
line of approach from where I had left him was along the 
fifteen feet or so of flat ground, and on this strip of flat ground 
we proceeded to bury the huge gin-trap, first removing from 
the ground every dead leaf, bit of stick, and blade of grass that 
were lying on it. 

After we had dug a hole sufficiently long, wide, and deep- 
removing the displaced earth to a distance— we put the gin- 
trap in it, and when the powerful springs that closed the jaws 
had been depressed, and the plate that constituted the trigger 
adjusted as delicately as we dared set it, we covered the whole 
trap with a layer of green leaves, over which we sprinkled 
earth, and blades of grass in the position we had found them. 

So carefully had the trap been set in the ground that we who 
had set it found it difficult to determine its exact position. 

My fishing-reel was now produced and one end of the dressed 
silk line was tied to the trigger of one rifle, looped round the 
butt-end, and taken to within ten feet of the kill, from where it 
was taken back, looped round the butt-end of the second rifle, 
and tied to the trigger. The line was then cut— much to my 
regret, for it was a new and very good line— and after the end 
had been tied round the woman's waist, the line was passed 
through the loop, the lines to the triggers pulled taut, and a 
secure knot was tied. The line was then cut for the second 
time. 

As we cast a final look over our handiwork— which appeared 
very good to us— it struck us that if the leopard was to wander 
round and approach the kill from our side, and not from the 
side we expected him to come, he might avoid both the guns 
and the gin-trap, and to prevent his doing so we sent to the 
village for a crowbar, while we cut five thornbushes from some 
little distance away. With the crowbar we made five holes a foot 



deep, on our side of the flat strip of ground, and into these 
holes we planted the bushes, stamping the earth round them 
and making them almost as secure and quite as natural to look 
at as when they were growing on the hillside. We were now 
quite satisfied that no animal bigger than a rat could approach 
the kill and eat any portion of it without meeting death in one 
form of another, so throwing off the safety-catches of the rifles, 
we returned to the village. 

Fifty yards from the village, and close to where we had on our 
arrival found the pool of blood, there was a big wide-spreading 
mango tree. In this tree we made a machan from planks 
procured from the village, and on it we piled a lot of sweet¬ 
smelling rice straw, for it was our intention to spend the night 
on it, in anticipation of having to finish off the leopard if he was 
caught in the gin-trap. 

Near sundown we took our position on the machan, which was 
long enough for us to lie on at length and wide enough for us to 
lie side by side. The distance from the machan to the kill across 
the ravine was two hundred yards, and the kill was on a higher 
level than the machan by about a hundred feet. 

Ibbotson feared that his aim with the telescopic sight fitted to 
his rifle would not be quite accurate, so while he took a pair of 
powerful field-glasses from their case, I loaded my -275 rifle. 
Our plan was that while Ibbotson concentrated on the portion 
of the hill along which we expected the leopard to come, I 
would keep a general look-out all over the hill, and if we saw 
the leopard, I would risk taking a shot, even if the shot had to 
be taken at the extreme range to which my rifle was sighted, 
which was three hundred yards. 

While Ibbotson dozed, I smoked and watched the shadows cast 
by the hills in the west slowly creep up the hill in front of us, 
and when the rays from the setting sun were gilding the crest 
of the hill red, Ibbotson awoke and picked up his field-glasses, 
and I picked up my rife, for the time had now come when we 
could expect the leopard to make his appearance. There was 



still some forty live-minutes of daylight left, and during the 
time we intently scanned— I with a pair of eyes that few are 
blessed with, and Ibbotson with his field-glasses— every foot of 
the considerable expanse of hill visible from 
our machan, without seeing the movement of a bird or animal. 

When there was no longer sufficient light to shoot by, I put 
down my rifle, and a little later Ibbotson returned his field- 
glasses to their case. One chance of killing the leopard had 
gone, but there were still three chances left, so we were not 
unduly depressed. 

Shortly after dark it came on to rain, and I whispered to 
Ibbotson that I feared it would prove our undoing, for if the 
additional weight of rain-water on the delicately set gin-trap 
did not set it off, the contracting of the fishing-line due to 
getting wet, no matter how slight it might be, would to a 
certainty fire off his hair-trigger rifle. Some time later, and 
while it was still raining, Ibbotson asked me what time it was. I 
had a luminous wrist-watch, and I had just told him it was a 
quarter to eight when a succession of savage and angry roars 
came from the direction of the kill— the leopard, the much- 
famed man-eating leopard of Rudraprayag, was at long last in 
the gin-trap. 

Ibbotson took a flying leap from the machan while I swung 
down from a branch, and that neither of us broke limbs in the 
descent can only be attributed to luck. The petromax lamp 
hidden in a nearby yam field was found, and while Ibbotson 
proceeded to light it, I gave expression to my fears and doubts, 
and admit I deserved Ibbotson's rejoinder, 'You are a rotten 
pessimist. First you think a few drops of rain are going to 
spring the trap and fire off my rifle, and now you think because 
the leopard is not making a noise that it has got out of the 
trap. 1 That was just what I was thinking, and fearing, for on 
that other occasion when we had trapped a leopard it had 
roared and growled continuously, whereas this one, after that 
one expression of rage which had brought us rumbling out of 



the machan, had been ominously silent. 

Ibbotson is an expert with all makes of lamps and in a very 
short time he had the petromax lit and pumped up, and 
throwing our doubts to the winds— for even Ibbotson was by 
now beginning to suspect the silence— we set off over the 
rough ground as hard as we could go, circling wide to avoid the 
fishing-lines and a possible angry leopard, and approached the 
kill from above. When we got to the high bank and looked down 
we saw the hole in the ground, but no gin-trap. Just as our 
hopes were bounding up, the brilliant light of the petromax 
revealed the trap; with its jaws closed and empty, ten yards 
down the hillside. The kill was no longer lying with its head 
against the bank, and a glance revealed that a considerable 
portion of it had been eaten. 

Our thoughts were too bitter to give expression to as we went 
back to the mango tree and climbed into the machan. There 
was no longer any need for us to keep awake, so heaping some 
of the straw over ourselves, for we had no bedding and the 
night was cold, we went to sleep. 

At the first streak of dawn a fire was built near the mango tree 
and water heated, and after we had drunk several cups of tea 
and warmed ourselves at the fire, we set off for the kill, 
accompanied by the patwari and several of Ibbotson's and my 
men, together with a number of men from the village. 

I mention the fact that there were two of us, and that we had 
the patwari and a number of men with us, for had I been alone 
I would have hesitated to relate what I am now going to tell 
you. 

Fiend or animal, had the slayer of the old woman been present 
and watched our overnight preparations it would even then 
have been difficult to understand how it had, on a dark and 
rainy night, avoided capture or death in one form or another. 
The rain, though light, had been sufficient to soften the ground, 
and we were able to reconstruct and to follow his every 



movement of the previous night. 

The leopard had come from the direction from which we had 
expected him to come, and on arrival at the flat strip of ground, 
had skirted round and below it, and had then approached the 
kill from the side where we had firmly planted the thornbushes. 
Three of these bushes he had pulled up, making a sufficiently 
wide gap to go through, and then, getting hold of the kill, he 
had drawn it a foot or so towards the rifles, thus slackening off 
the fishing-lines. Having done this he had started to eat, 
avoiding while doing so contact with the fishing-line that was 
tied round the woman's body. We had not thought it necessary 
to poison either the head or the neck. These he had eaten first, 
and then— very carefully— he had eaten all that portion of the 
body between the many doses of poison we had inserted in 
different places. 

After satisfying his hunger the leopard left the kill with the 
intention of seeking shelter from the rain and, while he was 
doing so, what I feared would happen actually happened. The 
weight of rainwater on the very finely set trap had depressed 
the plate that constituted the trigger, and released the springs 
just as the leopard was stepping over the trap, and the great 
jaws had met on either side of the stifle, or knee-joint, of his 
hind leg. And here was the greatest tragedy of all, for when 
bringing the trap up from Rudraprayag the men carrying it had 
let it fall, and one of the three-inch-long teeth had been broken 
off, and the stifle of the leopard's left hind leg had been caught 
by the jaws exactly where this missing tooth formed a gap in 
the otherwise perfectly fitting set of teeth. But for this missing 
tooth the leopard would have been fixed to the trap without any 
possibility of getting free, for the grip on his leg had been 
sufficiently good for him to lift the eighty-pound trap out of the 
hole in which we had buried it, and carry it ten yards down the 
hillside. And now; instead of the leopard, the jaws of the trap 
only held a tuft of hair and a small piece of skin, which we later 
— much later— had the great satisfaction of fitting back into 
position. 



However unbelievable the actions of the leopard may appear to 
have been, they were in fact just what one would have 
expected from an animal that had been a man-eater for eight 
years. Avoiding the open ground, and approaching the kill 
under cover; removing the thorn obstruction we bad erected 
across the blood trail he had left that morning; pulling the kill 
towards him into a convenient position for his meal, and 
rejecting those portions of the kill that we had poisoned— 
cyanide, of which he now had experience, has a very strong 
smell— were all quite normal and natural actions. 

The explanation I have given for the springing of the trap is, I 
am convinced, correct. It was just a coincidence that the 
leopard happened to be directly over the trap the very moment 
that the additional weight of water set it off. 

Having dismantled the gin-trap, and waited until the relatives 
had removed what remained of the old woman for cremation, 
we set out to walk back to Rudraprayag, leaving our men to 
follow us. Some time during the night the leopard had come to 
the mango tree, for we found his pug-marks near the tree 
where the pool of blood— now washed away by the rain— had 
been, and we followed these pug-marks down the track to the 
pilgrim road and four miles along the road to the gate of the 
Inspection Bungalow where, after scratching up the ground at 
the base of one of the pillars of the gate, he had gone on down 
the road for another mile to where my old friend the packman 
was camped, one of whose goats he had wantonly killed. 

I need not tell those of you who have carried a sporting rifle in 
any part of the world that all these many repeated failures and 
disappointments, so far from discouraging me, only 
strengthened my determination to carry on until that great day 
or night came when, having discarded poisons and traps, I 
would get an opportunity of using my rifle as rifles were 
intended to be used, to put a bullet truly and accurately into 
the man-eater's body. 



A Lesson in Caution 

I HAVE NEVER AGREED WITH those sportsmen who attribute 
all their failures in big-game hunting to their being Jonahs. 

The thoughts of a sportsman, whether they be pessimistic or 
whether they be optimistic, sitting waiting for an animal, 
cannot in any conceivable way influence the actions of the 
animal he is endeavouring to shoot or, maybe, to photograph. 

We are apt to forget that the hearing and sight of wild animals, 
and especially of those animals that depend exclusively on 
these senses not only for food but also for self-preservation, are 
on a plane far and away above that of civilized human beings, 
and that there is no justification for us to assume that because 
we cannot hear or see the movements of our prospective 
quarry, our quarry cannot hear or see our movements. A wrong 
estimation of the intelligence of animals, and the inability to sit 
without making any sound or movement for the required length 
of time, is the cause of all failures when sitting up for animals. 
As an example of the acute sense of hearing of carnivores, and 
the care it is necessary to exercise when contact with one of 
them is desired, I will relate one of my recent experiences. 

On a day in March, when the carpet of dry leaves on the 
ground recorded the falling of every dead leaf and the 
movements of the smallest of the birds that feed on the ground, 
I located in some very heavy undergrowth the exact position of 
a tiger I had long wished to photograph, by moving a troop 
of langurs in the direction in which I suspected the tiger to be 
lying up. Seventy yards from the tiger there was an open glade, 
fifty yards long and thirty yards wide. On the edge of the glade, 
away from the tiger, there was a big tree overgrown with 
creepers that extended right up to the topmost branches; 
twenty feet from the ground the tree forked in two. I knew that 
the tiger would cross the glade in the late afternoon, for the 
glade lay directly between him and his sambhar kill which I had 
found early that morning. There was no suitable cover near the 
kill for the tiger to lie up in during the day, so he had gone to 



the heavy undergrowth where the langurs had located him for 
me. 

It is often necessary when shooting or photographing tigers 
and leopards on foot, to know the exact position of one's 
quarry whether it be a wounded animal that one desires to put 
out of its misery or an animal that one wants to photograph, 
and the best way of doing this is by enlisting the help of birds 
or animals. With patience, and with a knowledge of the habit of 
the bird or animal the sportsman desires to use, it is not 
difficult to get a particular bird or animal to go in the required 
direction. The birds most suitable for this purpose are red 
jungle-fowl, peafowl, and white-capped babblers, and of 
animals the most suitable are kakars andlangurs. 

The tiger I am telling you about was unwounded and it would 
have been quite easy for me to go into the undergrowth and 
find him myself, but in doing so I should have disturbed him 
and defeated my own purposes, whereas by using the troop 
of langurs and knowing what their reactions would be on 
sighting the tiger— if he happened to be in the undergrowth— I 
was able to get the information I wanted without disturbing the 
tiger. 

Very carefully I stalked the tree I have referred to, and avoiding 
contact with the creepers, the upper tendrils and leaves of 
which might have been visible from where the tiger was lying, I 
climbed to the fork, where I had a comfortable seat and perfect 
concealment. Getting out my 16-mm cine-camera I made an 
opening to the screen of leaves in front of me just big enough 
to photograph through, and having accomplished all this 
without having made a sound, I sat still. My field of vision was 
confined to the glade and to the jungle immediately beyond it. 

After I had been sitting for an hour, a pair of bronzewing doves 
rose out of the jungle and went skimming over the low 
brushwood, and a minute or two later, and a little closer to me, 
a small flight of upland pipits rose off the ground and, after 
daintily tripping along the branches of a leafless tree, rose 



above the tree-tops and went off. Neither of these two species 
of birds has any alarm call, but I knew from their behaviour 
that the tiger was afoot and that they had been disturbed by 
him. Minutes later I was slowly turning my eyes from left to 
right scanning every foot of ground visible to me, when my 
eyes came to rest on a small white object, possibly an inch or 
two square, immediately in front of me, and about ten feet from 
the edge of the glade. Focusing my eyes on this stationary 
object for a little while, I then continued to scan the bushes to 
the limit of my field of vision to the right, and then back again 
to the white object. 

I was now convinced that this object had not been where it was 
for more than a minute or two before I had first caught sight of 
it, and that it could not be anything other than a white mark on 
the tiger's face. Quite evidently the tiger had heard me when I 
was approaching or climbing the tree, though I had done this in 
thin rubber shoes without making as far as I was aware any 
sound, and when the time had come for him to go to his kill he 
had stalked, for a distance of seventy yards over dry leaves, the 
spot he had pin-pointed as the source of some suspicious 
sound. After lying for half an hour without making any 
movement, he stood up, stretched himself, yawned, and, 
satisfied that he had nothing to fear, walked out into the glade. 
Here he stood, turning his head first to the right and then to 
the left, and then crossed the glade, passing right under my 
tree on his way to his kill. 

When in my wanderings through the jungles I see 
the machans that have been put up for the purpose of shooting 
carnivores, and note the saplings that have been felled near by 
to make the platform, the branches that have been cut to give a 
clear view; and see the litter and debris left lying about, and 
consider the talking and noise that must have accompanied 
these operations, I am not surprised when I hear people say 
they have sat up hundreds of times for tigers and leopards 
without ever having seen one of these animals, and attribute 
their failures to their being Jonahs. 



Our failure to bag the man-eater up to that date was not due to 
our having done anything we should not have done, or left 
undone anything we should have done. It could only be 
attributed to sheer bad luck. Bad luck that had prevented my 
receiving the electric light in time; that had given Ibbotson 
cramps in both legs; that had made the leopard eat an overdose 
of cyanide; and, finally, that had made the men drop the gin- 
trap and break the one tooth that mattered. So when Ibbotson 
returned to Pauri, after our failure to kill the leopard over the 
body of his seventy-year-old victim, I was full of hope, for I 
considered my chance of shooting the leopard as good as they 
were on the first day I arrived at Rudraprayag, and in fact 
better than they had then been, for I now knew the capabilities 
of the animal I had to deal with. 

One thing was causing me a lot of uneasiness and much heart¬ 
searching, and that was confining the man-eater to one bank of 
the river. However I looked at it, it did not appear to be right 
that the people on the left bank of the Alaknanda should be 
exposed to attacks by the leopard, while the people on the right 
bank were free from the risk of such attacks. Including the boy 
killed two days before our arrival, three people had recently 
lost their lives on the left bank, and others might meet with a 
like fate, and yet to open the two bridges and let the leopard 
cross over to the right bank would add an hundredfold to my 
difficulties, which were already considerable, and would not 
benefit Garhwal as a whole, for the lives of the people on the 
right bank of the river were just as valuable as the lives of the 
people on the left bank; so, very reluctantly, I decided to keep 
the bridges closed. And here I should like to pay my tribute to 
the people— numbering many thousands— living on the left 
bank of the river who, knowing that the closing of the bridges 
was confining the activities of the dread man-eater to their 
area, never once, during the months I closed the bridges, 
removed the barriers themselves, or asked me to do so. 

Having decided to keep the bridges closed, I sent a man to 
warn the villagers of their danger, and myself carried the 



warning to as many villages as time and my ability to walk 
permitted of my doing. No one whom I talked with on the roads 
and in the villages ever expressed one word of resentment at 
the leopard having been confined to their area, and everywhere 
I went I was offered hospitality and speeded on my way with 
blessings, and I was greatly encouraged by the assurances 
from both men and women— who did not know but what they 
might be the man-eater's next victim— that it was no matter for 
regret that the leopard had not died yesterday, for surely it 
would die today or, maybe, tomorrow. 



A Wild Boar Hunt 

THE OLD PACKMAN HAD ARRIVED at the thorn enclosure late 
the previous evening. He was packing salt and gur from the 
bazaar at Hardwar to the villages beyond Badrinath, and as his 
flock of sheep and goats was heavily laden and the last march 
had been a long one, he had arrived too late at the thorn 
enclosure to repair the weak places in it, with the result that 
several of the goats had strayed out of the enclosure and one of 
them the leopard had killed, close to the road, during the early 
hours of the morning. The barking of his dogs had awakened 
him, and when it got light, he saw his best goat— a beautiful 
steel-grey animal nearly as large as a Shetland pony— lying 
dead near the road, wantonly killed by the man-eater. 

The behaviour of the man-eater during the previous night 
showed the extent to which the habits of a leopard change 
when it has become a man-eater and has lived in close 
association with human beings over a long period of years. 

It was reasonable to assume that the man-eater had received a 
great shock, and a great fright, by being caught in the gin-trap; 
his having carried the heavy trap for ten yards and the angry 
way in which he had roared were in fact proof of this; and one 
would have expected him, the moment he got out of the trap, to 
have retired to some secluded spot as far removed from human 
habitation as possible, and to have remained there until he was 
again hungry, which he would not be for several days. But, so 
far from doing this, he had quite evidently remained in the 
vicinity of the kill, and after watching us climb into 
the machan and giving us time to go to sleep, had come to 
investigate; fortunately for us, Ibbotson had taken the 
precaution to protect the machan by putting wire-netting all 
round it, for it is not an unheard-of thing for man-eating 
leopards to kill people who are sitting up trying to shoot them. 
At the present time there is a man-eating leopard in the Central 
Provinces that has— at different times— killed and eaten four 
Indian sportsmen who were trying to shoot him; up to the time 



I last heard of this animal he had killed forty human beings, 
and owing to his habit of eating his would-be slayers, he was 
living a very peaceful and undisturbed life, varying his human 
diet with game and domestic animals. 

After his visit to the mango tree, our man-eater went along the 
village path to its junction with the track. Here, where we had 
found the pool of blood, he had turned to the right and gone 
down the track for a mile, and then along the pilgrim road for 
another four miles and into the most densely populated part of 
the area in which he was operating. On arrival at Rudraprayag, 
he had gone through the main street of the bazaar, and half a 
mile farther on had scratched up the ground at the gate of the 
Inspection Bungalow. The rain of the previous night had 
softened the clay surface of the road, and on the soft clay the 
pug-marks of the leopard showed up clearly; and from them it 
was possible to see that the leopard's encounter with the gin- 
trap had not resulted in injury to any of his limbs. 

After breakfast I took up the tracks at the gate and followed 
them to the packman's camp. From a bend in the road, a 
hundred yards from the camp, the leopard had caught sight of 
the goats that had strayed from the enclosure, and crossing 
from the outer to the inner edge of the road and creeping along 
under shelter of the hill he had stalked the grazing animals 
and, after killing the steel-grey goat but without even troubling 
to drink its blood, had returned to the road. 

In the thorn enclosure, guarding the dead goat and the neatly 
stacked pile of packs, were the packman's two sheep-dogs, 
tethered to stout pegs with short lengths of heavy chain. These 
big, black, and powerful dogs that are used by packmen 
throughout our hills are not accredited sheep-dogs in the same 
sense that sheep-dogs in Great Britain and in Europe are. On 
the march the dogs keep close to heel, and their duties— which 
they perform very efficiently— start when camp is made. At 
night they guard the camp against wild animals— I have known 
two of them to kill a leopard— and during the day and while the 



packmen are away grazing the flock they guard the camp 
against all intruders. A case is on record of one of these dogs 
having killed a man who was attempting to remove a pack from 
the camp it had been left to guard. 

I picked up the tracks of the leopard where he returned to the 
road after killing the goat, and followed them through Golabrai 
and for a mile farther on, to where a deep ravine crosses the 
road, up which he had gone. The distance the leopard had 
covered from the mango tree to the ravine was about eight 
miles. This long and seemingly aimless walk away from a kill 
was in itself a thing no ordinary leopard would under any 
circumstances have undertaken, nor would an ordinary leopard 
have killed a goat when he was not hungry. 

A quarter of a mile beyond the ravine the old packman was 
sitting on a rock by the side of the road, spinning wool and 
watching his flock, which were grazing on the open hillside. 
When he had dropped his spinning-stick and wool into the 
capacious pocket in his blanket robe and accepted a cigarette, 
he asked if I had come past his camp. When I told him I had 
done so and that I had seen what the evil spirit had done, and 
added that it would be wise to sell his dogs to camelmen on his 
next visit to Hardwar, for it was quite evident that they were 
lacking in courage, he nodded his head as one in agree-with 
what he heard. Then he said, 'Sahib, even we old hands are apt 
at times to make mistakes, and suffer for them, even as I have 
this night suffered by losing my best goat. My dogs have the 
courage of tigers, and are the best dogs in all Garhwal, and it is 
an insult to them for you to say they are only fit to be sold to 
camelmen. My camp as you doubtless observed, is very close to 
the road, and I feared that if by chance anyone came along the 
road by night, my dogs might do him an injury so I chained 
them up outside the thorn enclosure instead of leaving them 
loose, as is my wont. You have seen the result; but do not blame 
the dogs, sahib, for in their efforts to save my goat their collars 
have bitten deep into their necks, and made wounds that will 
take many days to heal . 1 



While we were talking, an animal appeared on the crest of the 
hill on the far side of the Ganges. From its colour and size, I at 
first thought it was a Himalayan bear, but when it started to 
come down the hill towards the river, I saw it was a big wild 
boar. The pig was followed by a pack of village pye dogs, who 
in turn were followed by a rabble of boys and men, all armed 
with sticks of varying size. Last of all came a man carrying a 
gun. As this man crested the hill he raised his piece and we 
saw a puff of smoke, and a little later heard the dull report of a 
muzzle-loading gun. The only living things within range of the 
gun were the boys and men, but as none of them dropped out 
of the race, the sportsman appeared to have missed them. 

The pig had a long grassy slope before him, with an odd bush 
dotted here and there, and below the grass slope was some 
broken ground, and below that again a dense belt of 
brushwood which extended right down to the river. 

On the rough broken ground the pig lost his lead, and pig and 
pye dogs disappeared into the brushwood together. Next 
minute all the dogs, with the exception of the big light-coloured 
animal that had been leading the pack, dashed back out of the 
brushwood. When the boys and men arrived they appeared to 
urge the dogs to re-enter the cover, but this— after apparently 
having recently seen what the pig could do with his tusks— 
they were unwilling to do. The man with the gun then arrived, 
and was immediately surrounded by the boys and men. 

To us sitting on our elevated grandstand with the river flowing 
between, the scene being enacted on the farther hill was a 
silent picture, for the noise of the water deadened sound and 
all we had heard was the dull report of the muzzle-loader. 

The sportsman was apparently as reluctant to enter the cover 
as the dogs were, for presently he broke away from his 
companions and sat down on a rock, as if to say, 'I have done 
my bit, now you do yours'. Confronted with this double 
dilemma— for the dogs, even after some of them had been 
beaten, stoutly refused to face the pig— first the boys and then 



the men started to throw stones into the brushwood. 


While this was going on, we saw the pig emerge from the lower 
end of the brushwood on to a narrow strip of sand. With a few 
quick steps he came out into the open, stood perfectly still for a 
few seconds, took a few more steps, stopped again, and then 
with a little run plunged into the river. Pigs— the wild variety- 
are exceptionally good swimmers, and they do not cut their 
throats with their hooves while swimming, as is generally 
believed. 

The current in the river was strong, but there is no bigger- 
hearted animal than our wild pig, and when I last saw the old 
boar he had been washed down the river a quarter of a mile, 
but was swimming strongly and was nearing our bank, which I 
have no doubt he reached safely. 

'Was the pig within range of your rifle, sahib ? 1 asked the 
packman. 

'Yes/ I replied, 'the pig was within range, but I have not 
brought a rifle to Garhwal to shoot pigs that are running for 
their lives, but to shoot what you think is an evil spirit, and 
what I know is a leopard/ 

'Have it your own way,' he rejoined; 'and now, as you are going, 
and we may never meet again, take my blessings with you, and 
time will prove whether you or I am right.' 

I regret I never saw the packman again, for he was a grand old 
man, as proud as Lucifer, and as happy as the day was long, 
when leopards were not killing his best goats and when the 
courage of his dogs was not being questioned. 



Vigil on a Pine Tree 

IBBOTSON RETURNED TO PAURI NEXT DAY, and the 
following morning, when I was visiting the villages on the hill 
to the east of Rudraprayag, I found the tracks of the man-eater 
on a path leading out of a village in which the previous night he 
had tried to break open the door of a house in which there was 
a child suffering from a bad cough. On following the tracks for 
a couple of miles they led me to the shoulder of the mountain 
where, some days previously, Ibbotson and I had sat up over 
the calling goat which the leopard had later killed. 

It was still quite early, and as there was a chance of finding the 
leopard basking on one of the rocks in this considerable area of 
broken ground, I lay on a projecting rock that commanded an 
extensive view. It had rained the previous evening— thus 
enabling me to track the leopard— and washed the haze out of 
the atmosphere. Visibility was at its best and the view from the 
projecting rock was as good as could be seen in any part of the 
world where mountains rise to a height of twenty-three 
thousand feet. Immediately below me was the beautiful valley 
of the Alaknanda, with the river showing as a gleaming silver 
ribbon winding in and out of it. On the hill beyond the river, 
villages were dotted about, some with only a single thatched 
hut, and others with long rows of slate-roofed houses. These 
row buildings are in fact individual homesteads, built one 
against the other to save expense and to economize space, for 
the people are poor and every foot of workable land in Garhwal 
is needed for agriculture. 

Beyond the hills were rugged rocks cliffs, down which 
avalanches roar in winter and early spring, and beyond and 
above the cliffs were the eternal snows, showing up against the 
intense blue sky as clear as if cut out of white cardboard. No 
more beautiful or peaceful scene could be imagined, and yet 
when the sun, now shining on the back of my head, set on the 
far side of the snow mountains, terror— terror which it is not 
possible to imagine until experienced— would grip, as it had 



done for eight long years, the area I was now overlooking. 

I had been lying on the rock for an hour when two men came 
down the hill, on their way to the bazaar. They were from a 
village about a mile farther up the hill that I had visited the 
previous day, and they informed me that a little before sunrise 
they had heard a leopard calling in this direction. We discussed 
the possibilities of my getting a shot at the leopard over a goat, 
and as at that time I had no goats of my own, they offered to 
bring me one from their village and promised to meet me 
where we were standing, two hours before sunset. 

When the men had gone I looked round for a place where I 
could sit. The only tree on the whole of this pail of the 
mountain was a solitary pine. It was growing on the ridge close 
to the path down which the men had come, and from under it a 
second path took off and ran across the face of the mountain 
skirting the upper edge of the broken ground, where I had 
recently been looking for the leopard. The tree commanded an 
extensive view, but it could be difficult to climb, and would 
afford little cover. However, as it was the only tree in the area, I 
had no choice, so decided I would try it. 

The men were waiting for me with a goat when I returned at 
about 4 p.m., and when, in reply to their question where I 
intended sitting, I pointed to the pine, they started laughing. 
Without a rope ladder, they said, it would not be possible to 
climb the tree; and further, if I succeeded in climbing the tree 
without a ladder, and carried out my intention of remaining out 
all night, I should have no protection against the man-eater, to 
whom the tree would offer no obstacle. There were two white 
men in Garhwal— Ibbotson was one of them— who had 
collected birds' eggs when boys, and both of whom could climb 
the tree; and as there is no exact equivalent in Hindustani for 
'waiting until you come to a bridge before crossing it 7 , I let the 
second part of the men's objection go unanswered, contenting 
myself by pointing to my rifle. 

The pine was not easy to climb, for there were no branches for 



twenty feet, but once having reached the lowest branch, the 
rest was easy. I had provided myself with a long length of 
cotton cord, and when the men had tied my rifle to one end of 
it, I drew it up and climbed to the top of the tree, where the 
pine-needles afforded most cover. 

The men had assured me that the goat was a good caller, and 
after they tied it to an exposed root of the tree they set off for 
their village promising to return early next morning. The goat 
watched the men out of sight, and then started to nibble the 
short grass at the foot of the tree. The fact that it had not up to 
then called once did not worry me, for I felt sure that it would 
presently feel lonely and that it would then do its share of the 
business of the evening, and if it did it while it was still night, 
from my elevated position I should be able to kill the leopard 
long before it got anywhere near the goat. 

When I climbed the tree the shadows cast by the snow 
mountains had reached the Alaknanda. Slowly these shadows 
crept up the hill and passed me, until only the top of the 
mountain glowed with red light. As this glow faded, long 
streamers of light shot up from the snow mountains where the 
rays of the setting sun were caught and held on a bank of 
clouds as soft and as light as thistledown. Everyone who has 
eyes to see a sunset— and the number, as you might have 
observed, is regrettably few— thinks that the sunsets in his 
particular part of the world are the best ever. I am no 
exception, for I too think that there are no sunsets in all the 
world to compare with ours, and a good second are the sunsets 
in northern Tanganyika, where some quality in the atmosphere 
makes snow-capped Kilimanjaro, and the clouds that are 
invariably above it, glow like molten gold in the rays of the 
setting sun. Our sunsets in the Himalayas are mostly red, pink, 
or gold. The one I was looking at the evening from my seat on 
the pine tree was rose pink, and the white shafts of light, 
starting as spear-points from valleys in the cardboard snows, 
shot through the pink clouds and, broadening, faded out in the 
sky overhead. 



The goat, like many human beings, had no interest in sunsets, 
and after nibbling the grass within reach, scratched a shallow 
hole for itself, lay down, curled up, and went to sleep. Here was 
a dilemma. I had counted on the animal now placidly sleeping 
below me to call up the leopard, and not once since I had first 
seen it had it opened its mouth, except to nibble grass, and 
now, having made itself comfortable, it would probably sleep 
throughout the night. To have left the tree at that hour in an 
attempt to return to the bungalow would have added one more 
to the number who deliberately commit suicide, and as I had to 
be doing something to kill the man-eater, and as— in the 
absence of a kill— one place was as good as another, I decided 
to stay where I was, and try to call up the leopard myself. 

If I were asked what had contributed most to my pleasure 
during all the years that I have spent in Indian jungles, I would 
unhesitatingly say that I had derived most pleasure from a 
knowledge of the language, and the habits, of the jungle-folk. 
There is no universal language in the jungles; each species has 
its own language, and though the vocabulary of some is limited, 
as in the case of porcupines and vultures, the language of each 
species is understood by all the jungle-folk. The vocal chords of 
human beings are more adaptable than the vocal chords of any 
of the jungle-Folk, with the one exception of the crested wire¬ 
tailed drongo, and for this reason it is possible for human 
beings to hold commune with quite a big range of birds and 
animals. The ability to speak the language of the jungle-folk, 
apart from adding hundredfold to one's pleasure in the jungle, 
can, if so desired, be put to great use. One example will suffice. 

Lionel Fortescue— up till recently a housemaster at Eton— and 
I were on a photographing and fishing tour in the Himalayas 
shortly after 1918, and we arrived one evening at a Forest 
Bungalow at the foot of a great mountain, on the far side of 
which was our objective, the Vale of Kashmir. We had been 
marching over hard ground for many days, and as the men 
carrying our luggage needed a rest, we decided to halt for a 
day at the bungalow. Next day, while Fortescue wrote up his 



notes, I set out to explore the mountain and try for a Kashmir 
stag. I had been informed by friends who had shot in Kashmir 
that it was not possible to shoot one of these stags without the 
help of an experienced shikari, and this was confirmed by 
the chowkidar in charge of the Forest Bungalow. With the 
whole day before me I set out alone, after breakfast, without 
having the least idea at what elevation the red deer lived, or 
the kind of ground on which they were likely to be found. The 
mountain, over which there is a pass into Kashmir, is about 
twelve thousand feet high, and after I had climbed to a height 
of eight thousand a storm came on. 

From the colour of the clouds I knew I was in for a hailstorm, 
so I selected with care a tree under which to shelter. I have 
seen both human beings and animals killed by hail, and by the 
lightning that invariably accompanies hailstorms, so rejecting 
the big fir trees with tapering tops I selected a small tree with 
a rounded top and dense foliage, and collecting a supply of 
dead wood and fir-cones, I built a fire, and for the hour that the 
thunder roared overhead and the hail lashed down, I sat at the 
foot of my tree safe and warm. 

The moment the hail stopped the sun came out, and from the 
shelter of the tree I stepped into fairyland, for the hail that 
carpeted the ground gave off a million points of light to which 
every glistening leaf and blade of grass added its quota. 
Continuing up for another two or three thousand feet, I came 
on an outcrop of rock, at the foot of which was a bed of blue 
mountain poppies. The stalks of many of these, the most 
beautiful of all wild flowers in the Himalayas, were broken, 
even so these sky-blue flowers standing in a bed of spotless 
white were a never-to-be-forgotten sight. 

The rocks were too slippery to climb, and there appeared to be 
no object in going to the top of the hill, so keeping to the 
contours I went to the left, and after half a mile through a 
forest of giant fir trees I came to a grassy slope which, starting 
from the top of the hill, extended several thousand feet down 



into the forest. As I came through the trees towards this grassy 
slope I saw on the far side of it an animal standing on a little 
knoll, with its tail towards me. From illustrations seen in game 
books I knew the animal was a red Kashmir deer, and when it 
raised its head, I saw it was a hind. 

On my side of the grassy slope, and about thirty yards from the 
edge of the forest, there was a big isolated rock some four feet 
high; the distance between this rock and the knoll was about 
forty yards. Moving only when the deer was cropping the grass, 
and remaining still each time she raised her head, I crept up to 
the shelter of the rock. The hind was quite obviously a sentinel, 
and from the way she looked to her right each time she raised 
her head, I knew she had companions, and the exact direction 
in which these companions were. To approach any nearer over 
the grass without being seen was not possible. To re-enter the 
forest and work down from above would not have been difficult 
but would have defeated my purpose, for the wind was blowing 
down the hill. There remained the alternative of re-entering the 
forest and skirting round the lower end of the grass slope, but 
this would take time and entail a stiff climb. I therefore finally 
decided to remain where I was and see if these deer— which I 
was seeing for the first time— would react in the same way 
as cheetaland sambhar do to the call of a leopard, of which I 
knew there was at least one on the mountain, for I had seen its 
scratch-marks earlier in the day. With only one eye showing, I 
waited until the hind was cropping the grass, and then gave the 
call of a leopard. 

At the first sound of my voice the hind swung round and, facing 
me, started to strike the ground with her forefeet. This was a 
warning to her companions to be on the alert, but those 
companions whom I wanted to see would not move until the 
hind called, and this she would not do until she saw the 
leopard. I was wearing a brown tweed coat, and projecting a 
few inches of my left shoulder beyond the rock I moved it up 
and down. The movement was immediately detected by the 
hind who, taking a few quick steps forward, started to call; the 



danger she had warned her companions of was in sight, and it 
was now safe for them to join her. The first to come was a 
yearling, which, stepping daintily over the hail-covered ground, 
ranged itself along side the hind; the yearling was followed by 
three stags, who in turn were followed by an old hind. The 
entire herd, numbering six in all, were now in full view at a 
range of thirty-five yards. The hind was still calling, while the 
others, with ears alternately held rigid or feeling forward and 
backward for sound and wind direction, were standing 
perfectly still and gazing into the forest behind me. My seat on 
the melting hail was uncomfortable and wet, and to remain 
inactive longer would possibly result in a cold. I had seen a 
representative herd of the much-famed Kashmir deer, and I had 
heard a hind call, but there was one thing more that I wanted. 
That was, to hear a stag call; so I again projected a few inches 
of my shoulder beyond the rock, and had the satisfaction of 
hearing the stags, the hinds, and the yearling calling in 
different pitched keys. 

My pass permitted me to shoot one stag, and for all I knew one 
of the stags might have carried a record head, but though I had 
set out that morning to look for a stag, and procure meat for 
the camp, I now realized that I was in no urgent need of a 
trophy. In any case the stag's meat would probably be tough so, 
instead of using the rifle, I stood up, and six of the most 
surprised deer in Kashmir vanished out of sight, and a moment 
later I heard them crashing through the undergrowth on the 
far side of the knoll. 

It was now time for me to retrace my steps to the bungalow, 
and I decided to go down the grassy slope and work through 
the lighter forest at the foot of the mountain. The slope was at 
an angle that lent itself to an easy lope, provided care was 
taken to see that every step was correctly placed. I was 
running in the middle of the hundred-yard open ground and 
had gone about six hundred yards when I caught sight of a 
white object, standing on a rock at the edge of the forest on the 
left-hand side of the slope, and about three hundred yards 



below me. A hurried glance convinced me that the white object 
was a goat, that had probably been lost in the forest. We had 
been without meat for a fortnight and I had promised Fortescue 
that I would bring something back with me, and there was my 
opportunity. The goat had seen me, and if I could disarm 
suspicion would possibly let me pass close enough to catch it 
by the legs; so as I loped along I edged to the left, keeping the 
animal in sight out of the corner of my eyes. Provided the 
animal stayed where it was, no better place on all the mountain 
could have been found on which to catch it, for the flat rock, at 
the very edge of which it was standing, jutted out into the 
slope, and was about five feet high. Without looking directly at 
it, and keeping up a steady pace, I ran past the rock and, as I 
did so, made a sweep with my left hand for its forelegs. With a 
sneeze of alarm the animal reared up, avoiding my grasp, and 
when I pulled up clear of the rock and turned round, I saw to 
my amazement that the animal I had mistaken for a white goat 
was an albino musk-deer. With only some ten feet between us 
the game little animal was standing its ground and sneezing 
defiance at me. Turning away I walked down the hill for fifty 
yards, and when I looked back, the deer was still standing on 
the rock, possibly congratulating itself on having frightened me 
away. When some weeks later I related the occurrence to the 
Game Warden of Kashmir he expressed great regret at my not 
having shot the deer, and was very anxious to know the exact 
locality in which I had seen it, but as my memory for places, 
and my description of localities, is regrettably faulty; I do not 
think that particular albino musk-deer is gracing any museum. 

Male leopards are very resentful of intrusion of others of their 
kind in the area they consider to be their own. True, the man- 
eater's territory extended over an area of five hundred square 
miles in which there were possibly many other male leopards; 
still, he had been in this particular area for several weeks, and 
might very reasonably consider it his own. And again, the 
mating season was only just over, and the leopard might 
mistake my call for the call of a female in search of a mate, so 



waiting until it was quite dark I called and, to my surprise and 
delight, was immediately answered by a leopard some four 
hundred yards below and a little to the right. 

The ground between us was strewn with great rocks and 
overgrown with matted thornbushes, and I knew the leopard 
would not come in a straight line towards me, and that he 
would probably skirt round the broken ground and come up a 
subsidiary ridge to the one my tree was on; this I found, when 
next he called, that he was doing. Five minutes later I located 
his call as coming from the path that, starting from my tree, 
ran across the face of the hill, about two hundred yards away. 
This call I answered, to give the leopard direction. Three, or it 
may have been four, minutes later, he called again from a 
distance of a hundred yards. 

It was a dark night and I had an electric torch lashed to the 
side of my rifle, and my thumb on the push button. From the 
root of the tree the path ran in a straight line for fifty yards, to 
where there was a sharp bend in it. It would not be possible for 
me to know when or where to direct the beam of the torch on 
this part of the path, so I should have to wait until the leopard 
was on the goat. 

Just beyond the bend, and only sixty yards away, the leopard 
again called, and was answered by another leopard far up the 
mountain-side. A complication as unexpected as it was 
unfortunate, for my leopard was too close now for me to call, 
and as he had last heard me from a distance of two hundred 
yards he would naturally assume that the coy female had 
removed herself farther up the hill and was calling to him to 
join her there. There was, however, just a possibility of his 
continuing along the path to its junction with the path coming 
down the hill, in which case he would be sure to kill the goat, 
even if he had no use for it. But the goat's luck was in, and 
mine out, for the leopard cut across the angle formed by the 
two paths, and the next time he called he was a hundred yards 
farther from me, and a hundred yards nearer his prospective 



coaxing mate. The calling of the two leopards drew nearer and 
nearer together, and finally stopped. After a long period of 
silence the caterwauling of these two giant cats came floating 
down to me from where I judged the grassland ended and the 
dense forest began. 

The leopard's luck was unfortunately in, in more ways than 
one, not least of all because it was dark, for leopards when 
courting are very easy to shoot. The same can be said of tigers, 
but the sportsman who goes on foot to look for courting tigers 
should be quite sure that he wants to see them, for a tigress— 
never a tiger— is very sensitive at these times, and quite 
understandably so, for males of the cat tribe are rough in their 
courting, and do not know how sharp their claws are. 

The leopard had not died, nor would he die that night, but may 
be he would die the next day, or the day after, for his sands 
were running out; and so for a long moment I thought were 
mine, for without any warning a sudden blast of wind struck 
the tree, and my heels and my head changed their relative 
position with the land of Garhwal. For seconds I thought it 
impossible for the tree to regain its upright position, or for me 
to retain contact with it. When the pressure eased, the tree and 
I got back to where we were before the wind struck us, and 
fearing that worse might follow, I hurriedly tied the rifle to a 
branch, to have the use of both hands. The pine had possibly 
withstood many wind-storms equally bad, if not worse, but 
never with a human being on it to add weight and increase 
wind-pressure. When the rifle was safe, I climbed out on to one 
branch after another, and broke off all the tassels of pine- 
needles that I could reach. It may only have been my 
imagination, but after I had lightened the tree it did not appear 
to heel over as dangerously as it had at first done. Fortunately 
the pine was comparatively young and supple, and its roots 
firm set, for it was tossed about like a blade of grass for an 
hour and then, as suddenly as it had started, the wind died 
down. There was no possibility of the leopard returning, so, 
after I had smoked a cigarette, I followed the goat into the land 



of dreams. 


As the sun was rising a cooee brought me back to within fifty 
feet of earth, and under the tree were my two companions of 
the previous evening, reinforced by two youths from their 
village. When they saw that I was awake they asked whether I 
had heard the leopards during the night, and what had 
happened to the tree, and were hugely amused when I told 
them I had had a friendly conversation with the leopards, and 
that having nothing else to do I had amused myself by breaking 
the branches of the tree. I then asked them if by chance they 
had noticed that there had been some little wind during the 
night, on which one of the youths answered, 'A little wind, 
sahib! Such a big wind has never been known, and it has blown 
away my hut! 7 To which his companion rejoined, 'That is no 
matter for regret, sahib, for Sher Singh has long been 
threatening to rebuild his hut, and the wind has saved him the 
trouble of dismantling the old one. 1 



My Night of Terror 

FOR SEVERAL DAYS AFTER MY EXPERIENCE on the pine tree 
I lost touch with the man-eater. He did not return to the broken 
ground and I found no trace of him, or of the female who had 
saved his life, in the miles of forest I searched on the high 
ground above the cultivated land. In these forests I was more 
at home, and if the leopards had been anywhere in them I 
should have been able to find them, for there were birds and 
animals in the forest that would have helped me. 

The female, being restless, was quite evidently straying far 
from her home when she heard me call from the top of the pine 
tree, and on being joined by the male had gone back to her own 
area, accompanied by the mate I had helped her to find. The 
male would presently return alone, and as the precautions now 
being taken by the people on the left bank were making it 
difficult for him to procure a human kill, he would probably try 
to cross over to the right bank of the Alaknanda, so for the next 
few nights I mounted guard on the Rudraprayag bridge. 

There were three approaches to the bridge on the left bank, the 
one from the south passing close to the 

bridge chowkidar's house, and on the fourth night I heard the 
leopard killing the chowkidar's dog; a friendly nondescript little 
beast that used to run out and greet me every time I passed 
that way. The dog seldom barked, but that night it had been 
barking for five minutes when suddenly the bark ended in a 
yelp, followed by the shouting of the chawkidar from inside his 
house, after which there was silence. The thornbushes had 
been removed from the archway and the bridge was open, yet 
though I lay with finger on trigger for the rest of the night the 
leopard did not try to cross. 

After killing the dog and leaving it lying on the road, the 
leopard, as I found from his tracks next morning, came to the 
tower. Five more steps in the direction in which he was going 
would have brought him out on the bridge, but those five steps 
he did not take. Instead he turned to the right, and after going 



a short distance up the footpath towards the bazaar, he 
returned and went up the pilgrim road to the north. A mile up 
the road I lost his tracks. 

Two days later I received a report that a cow had been killed 
the previous evening, seven miles up the pilgrim road. It was 
suspected that the cow had been killed by the man-eater, for 
the previous night— the night the dog had been killed— the 
leopard had tried to break open the door of a house close to 
where, the next evening, the cow had been killed. On the road I 
found a number of men waiting for me who, knowing that the 
walk up from Rudraprayag would be a hot one, had very 
thoughtfully provided a dish of tea. While we sat in the shade of 
a mango tree and smoked, and I drank the dish of tea, they told 
me that the cow had not returned with the herd the previous 
evening, and that it had been found between the road and the 
river when a search had been made for it that morning. They 
also told me of the many hairbreadth escapes each of them had 
had from the man-eater during the past eight years. I was very 
interested to learn from them that the leopard had only 
adopted his present habit of trying— and in many cases 
succeeding— to break open the doors of houses three years 
previously, and that before he had been content to take people 
who were outside their houses, or from houses the doors of 
which had been left open. 'Now,' they said, 'the shaitan has 
become so bold that sometimes when he has not been able to 
break down the door of a house, he has dug a hole through the 
mud wall, and got at his victims in the way. 1 

To those who do not know our hill-people, or understand their 
fear of the supernatural, it will seem incredible that a people 
renowned for their courage, and who have won the highest 
awards on the field of battle, should permit a leopard to break 
open a door, or to dig a hole in a wall of a house, in which in 
many cases there must have been men with axes, kukris, or, 
even in some cases, firearms at hand. I know of only one case 
in all those eight long years in which resistance was offered to 
the man-eater, and in that case the resister was a woman. She 



was sleeping alone in a house, the door of which she had left 
unfastened; this door, as in the case of the door of the house 
occupied by the woman who escaped with a lacerated arm, 
opened inwards. On entering the room the leopard seized the 
woman's left leg, and as it dragged her across the room, the 
woman's hand came in contact with a gandesa— a tool used for 
chopping chaff for cattle— and with this the woman dealt the 
leopard a blow. The leopard did not release his hold, but 
backed out of the room, and as it did so either the woman 
pushed the door, or else this happened accidentally. Whichever 
it may have been, with the woman on one side of the door and 
the leopard on the other, the leopard exerted its great strength 
and tore the limb from the woman's body. Mukandi Lai, at that 
time Member for Garhwal in the United Provinces Legislative 
Council, who was on an electioneering tour, arrived in the 
village the following day and spent a night in the room, but the 
leopard did not return. In a report to the Council, Mukandi Lai 
stated that seventy-five human beings had been killed by the 
leopard in the course of that one year, and he asked the 
Government to launch a vigorous campaign against the man- 
eater. 

Accompanied by one of the villagers to show me the way, and 
by Madho Singh, I went down to the kill. The cow had been 
killed in a deep ravine a quarter of a mile from the road and a 
hundred yards from the river. On one side of the ravine there 
were big rocks with dense brushwood between, and on the 
other side of the ravine there were a few small trees, none of 
which was big enough to sit in. Under the trees, and about 
thirty yards from the kill, there was a rock with a little hollow 
at the base of it, so in the hollow I decided to sit. 

Both Madho Singh and the villager objected very strongly to 
my sitting on the ground, but as this was the first animal kill I 
had got since my arrival at Rudraprayag in a place where it 
was reasonable to expect the leopard to come at an early hour 
— about sundown— I overruled their objections, and sent them 
back to the village. 



My seat was dry and comfortable, and with my back to the rock 
and a small bush to conceal my legs I was confident the leopard 
would not see me, and that I should be able to kill it before it 
was aware of my presence. I had provided myself with a torch 
and a knife, and with my good rifle across my knees I felt that 
in this secluded spot my chances of killing the leopard were 
better than any I had yet had. 

Without movement and with my eyes on the rocks in front of 
me I sat through the evening, each second bringing the time 
nearer when the undisturbed and unsuspecting leopard would 
for a certainty return to his kill. The time I had been waiting for 
had come, and was passing. Objects near at hand were 
beginning to get blurred and indistinct. The leopard was a little 
later in coming than I had expected him to be, but that was not 
worrying me, for I had a torch, and the kill was only thirty 
yards from me, and I would be careful over my shot and make 
quite sure that I did not have a wounded animal to deal with. 

In the deep ravine there was absolute silence. The hot sun of 
the past few days had made the dead leaves on the bank on 
which I was sitting as dry as tinder. This was very reassuring, 
for it was now dark and whereas previously I had depended on 
my eyes for protection I now had to depend on my ears, and 
with thumb on the button of the torch and finger on trigger I 
was prepared to shoot in any direction in which I heard the 
slightest sound. 

The non-appearance of the leopard was beginning to cause me 
uneasiness. Was it possible that from some concealed place 
among the rocks he had been watching me all these hours, and 
was he now licking his lips in anticipation of burying his teeth 
in my throat?— for he had long been deprived of human flesh. 

In no other way could I account for his not having come, and if 
I were to have the good fortune to leave the ravine on my feet, 
my ears would have to serve me now as they had never served 
me before. 


For what seemed like hours I strained my ears and then. 



noticing it letting darker than it should have been, I turned my 
eyes up to the sky and saw that a heavy bank of clouds was 
drifting across the sky obscuring the stars one by one. Shortly 
thereafter big drops of rain started to fall, and where there had 
been absolute and complete silence there was now sound and 
movement all round— the opportunity the leopard had been 
waiting for had come. Hastily taking off my coat I wound it 
round my neck, fastening it securely in place with the sleeves. 
The rifle was now useless but might help to cause a diversion, 
so transferring it to my left hand I unsheathed my knife and got 
a good grip of it with my right hand. The knife was what is 
called an Afridi stabbing knife, and I devoutly hoped it would 
serve me as well as it had served its late owner, for when 
buying it from the Government store at Hangu on the North¬ 
west Frontier, the Deputy Commissioner had drawn my 
attention to a label attached to it and to three notches on the 
handle, and said it had figured in three murders. Admittedly a 
gruesome relic, but I was glad to have it in my hand, and I 
clutched it tight while the rain lashed down. 

Leopards, that is ordinary forest leopards, do not like rain and 
invariably seek shelter, but the man-eater was not an ordinary 
leopard, and there was no knowing what his likes or dislikes 
were, or what he might or might not do. 

When Madho Singh was leaving he asked how long I intended 
sitting up, and I had answered 'Until I have shot the leopard,' 
so I could expect no help from him, and of help I was at that 
time in urgent need. Should I go or should I remain were the 
questions that were troubling me, and one option was as 
unattractive as the other. If the leopard up to then had not seen 
me it would be foolish to give my position away, and possibly 
fall across him on the difficult ground I should have to 
negotiate on my way up to the pilgrim road. On the other hand 
to remain where I was for another six hours— momentarily 
expecting to have to fight for my life with an unfamiliar weapon 
— would put a strain on my nerves which they were not 
capable of standing; so getting to my feet and shouldering the 



rifle, I set off. 


I had not far to go, only about five hundred yards, half of which 
was over wet clay and the other half over rocks worn smooth 
by bare feet and the hooves of cattle. Afraid to use the torch for 
fear of attracting the man-eater, and with one hand occupied 
with the rifle and the other with the knife, my body made as 
many contacts with the ground as my rubber-shod feet. When I 
eventually reached the road I sent a full-throated cooee into the 
night, and a moment later I saw a door in the village far up the 
hillside open and Madho Singh and his companion emerge, 
carrying a lantern. 

When the two men joined me Madho Singh said he had had no 
uneasiness about me until the rain started, and that he had 
then lit the lantern, and sat with his ear against the door 
listening. Both men were willing to accompany me back to 
Rudraprayag, so we set out on our seven-mile walk, Bachi 
Singh leading, Madho Singh carrying the lantern following, and 
I bringing up the rear. When I returned next day I found the kill 
had not been touched, and on the road I found the tracks of the 
man-eater. What time had elapsed between our going down the 
road and the man-eater following us, it was not possible to say. 

When I look back on that night, I look back on it as my night of 
terror. I have been frightened times without number, but never 
have I been frightened as I was that night when the unexpected 
rain came down and robbed me of all my defences, and left me 
for protection a murderer's knife. 



Leopard Fights Leopard 

AFTER FOLLOWING US TO RUDRAPRAYAG THE leopard went 
down the pilgrim road through Golabrai, past the ravine up 
which he had gone a few days previously and then up a rough 
track which the people living on the hills to the east of 
Rudraprayag use as a short cut on their way to and from 
Hard war. 

The pilgrimage to Kedarnath and Badrinath is seasonal, and 
the commencement of the pilgrimage and its duration depend 
in the one case on the melting and in the other on the falling of 
snow in the upper reaches of the high mountains in which 
these two shrines are situated. The High Priest of Badrinath 
temple had a few days previously sent the telegram that is 
eagerly awaited by good Hindus throughout the length and 
breadth of India, announcing that the road was open, and for 
the past few days pilgrims in small numbers had been passing 
through Rudraprayag. 

During the past few years the man-eater had killed several 
pilgrims on the road, and it appeared to be his more or less 
regular habit while the pilgrim season lasted to go down the 
road to the extent of his beat, and then circle round through 
the villages on the hills to the east of Rudraprayag, and rejoin 
the Road anything up to fifteen miles above Rudraprayag. The 
time taken for this round trip varied, but on an average I had 
seen the leopard's tracks on the stretch of road between 
Rudraprayag and Golabrai once in every five days, so on my 
way back to the Inspection 

Bungalow I selected a place from where I could overlook the 
road, and for the next two nights sat in great comfort on a 
hayrick, without however seeing anything of the leopard. 

I received no news of the man-eater from outlying villages for 
two days, and on the third morning I went down the pilgrim 
road for six miles to try to find out if he had recently visited any 
of the villages in the direction. From this twelve-mile walk I 



returned at midday; and while I was having a late breakfast two 
men arrived and reported that a boy had been killed the 
previous evening at Bhainswara, a village eighteen miles south¬ 
east of Rudraprayag. 

The intelligence system introduced by Ibbotson was working 
splendidly Under this system cash rewards, on a graduated 
scale, were paid for information about all kills in the area in 
which the man-eater was operating. These rewards, starting 
with two rupees for a goat and working up to twenty rupees for 
a human being, were keenly contested for, and so ensured our 
receiving information about all kills in the shortest time 
possible. 

When I put ten rupees into the hands of each of the men who 
had brought me news about the boy, one of them offered to 
accompany me back to Bhainswara to show me the way, while 
the other said he would stay the night at Rudraprayag as he 
had recently had fever and could not do another eighteen miles 
that day. I finished breakfast while the men were telling me 
their tale, and a little before 1 p.m. I set off, taking only my 
rifle, a few cartridges, and a torch with me. As we crossed the 
road near the Inspection Bungalow and started up the steep 
hill on the far side of it, my companion informed me we had a 
very long way to go, adding that it would not be safe for us to 
be out after dark, so I told him to walk ahead and set the pace. 

I never— if I can help it— walk uphill immediately after a meal, 
but here I had no option, and for the first three miles, in which 
we climbed four thousand feet, I had great difficulty in keeping 
up with my guide. A short stretch of comparatively flat ground 
at the end of the three miles gave me back my wind, and after 
that I walked ahead and set the pace. 

On their way to Rudraprayag the two men had told the people 
in the villages they had passed through about the kill, and of 
their intention to try and persuade me to accompany them back 
to Bhainswara. I do not think that anyone doubted that I would 
answer to the call, for at every village the entire population 



were waiting for me, and while some gave me their blessings, 
others begged me not to leave the district until I had killed 
their enemy. 

My companion had assured me that we had eighteen miles to 
go, and as we crested hill after hill with deep valleys between I 
realized I had undertaken to walk against time eighteen of the 
longest and hardest miles I had ever walked. The sun was near 
setting when, from the crest of one of these unending hills, I 
saw a number of men standing on a ridge a few hundred yards 
ahead of us. On catching sight of us some of the men 
disappeared over the ridge, while others came forward to meet 
us. The headman of Bhainswara was among the latter, and after 
he had greeted me, he cheered me by telling me that his village 
was just over the crest of the hill, and that he had sent his son 
back to get tea ready. 

The 14th of April 1926 is a date that will long be remembered 
in Garhwal, for it was on that day that the man-eating leopard 
of Rudraprayag killed his last human victim. On the evening of 
that day a widow and her two children, a girl aged nine and a 
boy aged twelve, accompanied by a neighbour's son aged eight, 
went to a spring a few yards from Bhainswara village to draw 
water for the preparation of their evening meal. 

The widow and her children occupied a house in the middle of 
a long row of homesteads. These homesteads were double¬ 
storied, the low-ceilinged ground floor being used for the 
storage of grain and fuel, and the first floor for residences. A 
veranda four feet wide ran the entire length of the building, 
and short flights of stone steps flanked by walls gave access to 
the veranda, each flight of steps being used by two families. A 
flagged courtyard, sixty feet wide and three hundred feet long, 
bordered by a low wall, extended along the whole length of the 
building. 

The neighbour's son was leading as the party of four 
approached the steps used by the widow and her children, and 
as the boy started to mount the steps he saw an animal, which 



he mistook for a dog, lying in an open room on the ground floor 
adjoining the steps; he said nothing about the animal at the 
time, and the others apparently did not see it. The boy was 
followed by the girl, the widow came next, and her son brought 
up the rear. When she was half-way up the short flight of stone 
steps, the mother heard the heavy brass vessel her son was 
carrying crash on the steps and go rolling down them; 
reprimanding him for his carelessness, she set her own vessel 
down on the veranda and turned to see what damage her son 
had done. At the bottom of the steps she saw the overturned 
vessel. She went down and picked it up, and then looked round 
for her son. As he was nowhere in sight she assumed he had 
got frightened and had run away, so she started calling to him. 

Neighbours in adjoining houses had heard the noise made by 
the falling vessel and now, hearing the mother calling to her 
son, they came to their doors and asked what all the trouble 
was about. It was suggested that the boy might be hiding in 
one of the ground-floor rooms, so as it was now getting dark in 
these rooms, a man lit a lantern and came down the steps 
towards the woman, and as he did so he saw drops of blood on 
the flagstones where the woman was standing. At the sound of 
the man's horrified ejaculation other people descended into the 
courtyard, among whom was an old man who had accompanied 
his master on many shooting expeditions. Taking the lantern 
from the owner's hand, this old man followed the blood trail 
across the courtyard and over the low wall. Beyond the wall 
was a drop of eight feet into a yam field; here in the soft earth 
were the splayed-out pug-marks of a leopard. Up to that 
moment no one suspected that the boy had been carried off by 
a man-eater, for though everyone had heard about the leopard 
it had never previously been within ten miles of their village. As 
soon as they realized what had happened the women began 
screaming and while some men ran to their houses for drums, 
others ran for guns— of which there were three in the village 
and in a few minutes pandemonium broke out. Throughout the 
night drums were beaten and guns were fired. At daylight the 



boy's body was recovered, and two men were dispatched to 
Rudraprayag to inform me. 

As I approached the village in company with the headman, I 
heard the wailing of a woman mourning her dead. It was the 
mother of the victim, and she was the first to greet me. Even to 
my unpractised eye it was apparent that the bereaved mother 
had just weathered one hysterical storm and was heading for 
another, and as I lack the art of dealing with people in this 
condition I was anxious to spare the woman a recital of the 
events of the previous evening; but she appeared to be eager to 
give me her version of the story, so I let her have her way. As 
the story unfolded itself it was apparent that her object in 
telling it was to ventilate her grievance against the men of the 
village for not having run after the leopard and rescued her son 
'as his father would have done had he been alive'. In her 
accusation against the men I told her she was unjust, and in 
her belief that her son could have been rescued alive, I told her 
she was wrong. For when the leopard clamped his teeth round 
the boy's throat, the canine teeth dislocated the head from the 
neck and the boy was already dead before the leopard carried 
him across the courtyard, and nothing the assembled men— or 
anyone else— could have done would have been of any use. 

Standing in the courtyard drinking the tea that had 
thoughtfully been provided for me, and noting the hundred or 
more people who were gathered round, it was difficult to 
conceive how an animal the size of a leopard had crossed the 
courtyard in daylight without being seen by any of the people 
who must have been moving about at that time, or how its 
presence had gone undetected by the dogs in the village. 

I climbed down the eight-foot wall that the leopard carrying the 
boy had jumped down, and followed the drag across the yam 
field, down another wall twelve feet high, and across another 
field. At the edge of this second field there was a thick hedge of 
rambler roses, four feet high. Here the leopard had released 
his hold on the boy's throat, and after searching for an opening 



in the hedge and not finding one, he had picked the boy up by 
the small of the back and, leaping the hedge, gone down a wall 
ten feet high on the far side. There was a cattle track at the 
foot of this third wall and the leopard had only gone a short 
distance along it when the alarm was raised in the village. The 
leopard had then dropped the boy on the cattle track and gone 
down the hill. He was prevented from returning to his kill by 
the beating of drums and the firing of guns which had gone on 
all night in the village. 

The obvious thing for me to have done would have been to 
carry the body of the boy back to where the leopard had left it, 
and to have sat over it there. But here I was faced with two 
difficulties— the absence of a suitable place in which to sit, and 
my aversion to sitting in an unsuitable place. 

The nearest tree, a leafless walnut, was three hundred yards 
away, and was therefore out of the question, and quite frankly I 
lacked the courage to sit on the ground. I had arrived at the 
village at sundown; it had taken a little time to drink the tea, 
hear the mother's story, and trail the leopard, and there was 
not sufficient daylight left for me to construct a shelter that 
would have given me even the semblance of protection; 
therefore if I sat on the ground I should have to sit just 
anywhere, not knowing from which direction the leopard would 
come, and knowing full well that if the leopard attacked me I 
should get no opportunity of using the one weapon with which I 
was familiar, my rifle, for when in actual contact with an 
unwounded leopard or tiger it is not possible to use firearms. 

When after my tour of inspection I returned to the courtyard, I 
asked the headman for a crowbar, a stout wooden peg, a 
hammer, and a dog chain. With the crowbar I prised up one of 
the flagstones in the middle of the courtyard, drove the peg 
firmly into the ground, and fastened one end of the chain to it. 
Then with the help of the headman I carried the body of the 
boy to the peg and chained it there. 

The working of the intangible force which sets a period to life. 



which one man calls Fate and another calls kismet, is 
incomprehensible. During the past few days this force had set a 
period to the life of a breadwinner, leaving his family destitute; 
had ended in a very painful way the days of an old lady who 
after a lifetime of toil was looking forward to a few short wars 
of comparative comfort; and now, had cut short the life of this 
boy who, by the look of him, had been nurtured with care by 
his widowed mother. Small wonder then that the bereaved 
mother should, in between her hysterical crying, be repeating 
over and over and over again, 'What crime, Parmeshwar, has 
my son, who was loved by all, committed that on the threshold 
of life he has deserved death in this terrible way?' 

Before prising up the flagstone, I had asked for the mother and 
her daughter to be taken to a room at the very end of the row 
of buildings. My preparations completed, I washed at the 
spring and asked for a bundle of straw, which I laid on the 
veranda in front of the door of the house vacated by the 
mother. 

Darkness had now fallen. Having asked the assembled people 
to be as silent during the night as it was possible for them to be 
and sent them to their respective homes, I took up my position 
on the veranda, where by lying prone on my side and heaping a 
little straw in front, I could get a clear view of the kill without 
much chance of being seen myself. 

In spite of all the noise that had been made the previous night, 

I had a feeling that the leopard would return, and that when he 
failed to find his kill where he had left it, he would come to the 
village to try to secure another victim. The ease with which he 
had got his first victim at Bhainswara would encourage him to 
try again, and I started my vigil with high hopes. 

Heavy clouds had been gathering all the evening, and at 8 p.m., 
when all the village sound— except the wailing of the woman— 
were hushed, a flash of lightning followed by a distant roll of 
thunder heralded an approaching storm. For an hour the storm 
raged, the lightning being so continuous and brilliant that had 



a rat ventured into the courtyard I should have seen and 
probably been able to shoot it. The rain eventually stopped but, 
the sky remaining overcast, visibility was reduced to a few 
inches. The time had now come for the leopard to start from 
wherever he had been sheltering from the storm, and the time 
of his arrival would depend on the distance of that place from 
the village. 

The woman had now stopped wailing, and in all the world there 
appeared to be no sound. This was as I had hoped, for all I had 
to warn me that the leopard had come were my ears, and to 
help them I had used the dog chain instead of a rope. 

The straw that had been provided for me was as dry as tinder 
and my ears, straining into the black darkness, first heard the 
sound when it was level with my feet— something was 
creeping, very stealthily creeping, over the straw on which I 
was lying. I was wearing an article of clothing called shorts, 
which left my legs bare in the region of my knees. Presently, 
against this bare skin, I felt the hairy coat of an animal 
brushing. It could only be the man-eater, creeping up until he 
could lean over and get a grip of my throat. A little pressure 
now on my left shoulder— to get a foothold— and then, just as I 
was about to press the trigger of the rifle to cause a diversion, 
a small animal jumped down between my arms and my chest. It 
was a little kitten, soaking wet, that had been caught out in the 
storm and, finding every door shut, had come to me for warmth 
and protection. 

The kitten had hardly made itself comfortable inside my coat, 
and I was just beginning to recover from the fright it had given 
me, when from beyond the terraced fields there was some low 
growling which gradually grew louder, and then merged into 
the most savage fight I have ever heard. Quite evidently the 
man-eater had returned to the spot where the previous night 
he had left his kill, and while he was searching for it, in not too 
good a temper, another male leopard who looked upon this 
particular area as his hunting-ground, had accidentally come 



across him and set on him. Fights of the nature of the one that 
was taking place in my hearing are very unusual, for carnivores 
invariably keep to their own areas, and if by chance two of the 
same sex happen to meet, they size up each other's capabilities 
at a glance, and the weaker gives way to the stronger. 

The man-eater, though old, was a big and a very powerful male, 
and in the five hundred square miles he ranged over there was 
possibly no other male capable of disputing his rule, but here at 
Bhainswara he was a stranger and a trespasser, and to get out 
of the trouble he had brought on himself he would have to fight 
for his life. And this he was undoubtedly doing. 

My chance of getting a shot had now gone, for even if the man- 
eater succeeded in defeating his attacker, his injuries would 
probably prevent him from taking any interest in kills for some 
time to come. There was even a possibility of the fight ending 
fatally for him, and here would indeed be an unexpected end to 
his career: killed in an accidental encounter by one of his own 
kind, when the combined efforts of the Government and the 
public had failed, over a period of eight years, to accomplish 
this end. 

The first round, lasting about five minutes, was fought with 
unabating savagery, and was inconclusive, for at the end of it I 
could still hear both animals. After an interval of ten or fifteen 
minutes the fight was resumed, but at a distance of two to 
three hundred yards from where it had originally started; quite 
evidently the local champion was getting the better of the fight 
and was gradually driving the intruder out of the ring. The 
third round was shorter than the two that had preceded it, but 
was no less savage, and when after another long period of 
silence the fight was again resumed, the scene had receded to 
the shoulder of the hill, where after a few minutes it died out of 
hearing. 

There were still six hours of darkness left; even so I knew my 
mission to Bhainswara had failed, and that my hope that the 
fight would be fought to a finish and would end in the death of 



the man-eater had been short-lived. In the running fight into 
which the contest had now degenerated the man-eater would 
sustain injuries, but they were not likely to reduce his craving 
for human flesh or impair his ability to secure it. 

The kitten slept peacefully throughout the night, and as the 
first streak of dawn showed in the east I descended into the 
courtyard and carried the boy to the shed from where we had 
removed him, and covered him with the blanket which 
previously had been used for the purpose. The headman was 
still asleep when I knocked on his door. I declined the tea, 
which I knew would take some time to make, and assured him 
that the man-eater would never again visit his village; and 
when he had promised to make immediate arrangements to 
have the boy carried to the burning-ghat, I set off on my long 
walk back to Rudraprayag. 

No matter how often we fail in any endeavour, we never get 
used to the feeling of depression that assails us after each 
successive failure. Day after day over a period of months I had 
left the Inspection Bungalow full of hope that on this particular 
occasion I would meet with success, and day after day I had 
returned disappointed and depressed. Had my failures only 
concerned myself they would not have mattered, but in the task 
I had undertaken those failures concerned others more than 
they concerned me. Bad luck— for to nothing else could I 
attribute my failures— was being meted out to me in ever- 
increasing measure, and the accumulated effect was beginning 
to depress me and give me the feeling that I was not destined 
to do what I had set out to do. What but bad luck had made the 
man-eater drop his kill where there were no trees? And what 
but bad luck had made a leopard who possibly had thirty 
sguare miles in which to wander, arrive at a particular spot in 
those thirty miles just as the man-eater, not finding his kill 
where he had left it, was guite conceivably on his way to the 
village where I was waiting for him? 

The eighteen miles had been long yesterday but they were 



longer today and the hills were steeper. In the villages I passed 
through the people were eagerly awaiting me, and though I 
only had bad news they did not show their disappointment. 
Their boundless faith in their philosophy a faith strong enough 
to move mountains and very soothing to depressed feelings, 
that no human beings and no animals can die before their 
appointed time, and that the man-eater's time had not yet 
come, called for no explanation, and admitted of no argument. 

Ashamed of the depression and feeling of frustration that I had 
permitted to accompany me throughout the morning, I left the 
last village— where I had been made to halt and drink a cup of 
tea— greatly cheered, and as I swung down the last four miles 
to Rudraprayag I became aware that I was treading on the pug- 
marks of the man-eater. Strange how one's mental condition 
can dull, or sharpen, one's powers of observation. The man- 
eater had quite possibly joined the track many miles farther 
back, and now, after my conversation with the simple village- 
folk and a drink of tea— I was seeing his pug-marks for the first 
time that morning. The track here ran over red clay which the 
rain had softened, and the pug marks of the man-eater showed 
that he was walking at his accustomed pace. Half a mile farther 
on he started to quicken his pace, and this pace he continued 
to maintain until he reached the head of the ravine above 
Golabrai; down this ravine the leopard had gone. 

When a leopard or tiger is walking at its normal pace only the 
imprints of the hind feet are seen, but when the normal pace is 
for any reason exceeded, the hind feet are placed on the 
ground in advance of the forefeet, and thus the imprints of all 
four feet are seen. From the distance between the imprints of 
the fore and the hind feet it is possible to determine the speed 
at which an animal of the cat tribe was travelling. The coming 
of daylight would in this instance have been sufficient reason 
for the man-eater to have quickened his pace. 

I had previously had experience of the man-eater's walking 
capabilities, but only when ranging his beat in search of food. 



Here he had a better reason for the long walk he had 
undertaken, for he was anxious to put as great a distance as 
possible between himself and the leopard who had given him a 
lesson in the law of trespass; how severe that lesson had been 
will be apparent from a description given later. 



A Shot in the Dark 

MEALTIMES IN INDIA VARY ACCORDING TO the season of 
the year and individual tastes. In most establishments the 
recognized times for the three principal meals are: breakfast, 8 
to 9; lunch, 1 to 2; and dinner, 8 to 9. During all the months I 
was at Rudraprayag my mealtimes were very erratic, and 
contrary to the accepted belief that health depends on the 
composition and regularity of meals, my unorthodox and 
irregular meals kept me fighting fit. Porridge supped at 8 p.m., 
soup taken at 8 a.m., one combined meal in the day or no meal 
at all, appeared to have no injurious effect beyond taking a 
little flesh off my bones. 

I had eaten nothing since my breakfast the previous day, so as I 
intended spending the night out I had a nondescript meal on 
my return from Bhainswara, and after an hour's sleep and a 
bath set off for Golabrai to warn the pundit who owned the 
pilgrim shelter of the presence in his vicinity of the man-eater. 

I had made friends with the pundit on my first arrival at 
Rudraprayag and I never passed his house without having a 
few words with him, for in addition to the many interesting 
tales he had to tell about the man-eater and the pilgrims who 
passed through Golabrai, he was one of the only two people— 
the woman who escaped with the lacerated arm being the 
other— whom I met during my stay in Garhwal who had 
survived an encounter with the man-eater. 

One of his tales concerned a woman who had lived in a village 
further down the road, and with whom he had been acquainted. 
After a visit to the Rudraprayag bazaar one day this woman 
arrived at Golabrai late in the evening, and fearing she would 
not be able to reach her home before dark she asked 
the pundit to let her spend the night in his shelter. This he 
permitted her to do advising her to sleep in front of the door of 
the storeroom in which he kept the articles of food purchased 
by the pilgrims, for, he said, she would then be protected by the 
room on the one side, and by the fifty or more pilgrims who 



were spending the night in the shelter on the other. 

The shelter was a grass shed open on the side nearest the road, 
and boarded up on the side nearest the hill; the store-room was 
midway along the shed, but was recessed into the hill and did 
not obstruct the floor of the shed, so when the woman lay down 
at the door of the store-room there were rows of pilgrims 
between her and the road. Some time during the night one of 
the women pilgrims screamed out and said she had been stung 
by a scorpion. No lights were available, but with the help of 
matches the woman's foot was examined and a small scratch 
from which a little blood was flowing was found on her foot. 
Grumbling that the woman had made a lot of fuss about 
nothing, and that in any case blood did not flow from a 
scorpion sting, the pilgrims soon composed themselves and 
resumed their sleep. 

In the morning, when the pundit arrived from his house on the 
hill above the mango tree, he saw a sari worn by hill-women 
lying on the road in front of the shelter, and on the sari there 
was blood. The pundit had given his friend what he considered 
to be the safest place in the shelter, and with fifty or more 
pilgrims lying all round her the leopard had walked over the 
sleeping people, killed the woman, and accidentally scratched 
the sleeping pilgrim's foot when returning to the road. The 
explanation given by the pundit as to why the leopard had 
rejected the pilgrims and carried off the hill-woman was that 
she was the only person in the shelter that night who was 
wearing a coloured garment. This explanation is not 
convincing, and but for the fact that leopards do not hunt by 
scent, my own explanation would have been that of all the 
people in the shelter the hill-woman was the only one who had 
a familiar smell. Was it just bad luck, or fate, or being the only 
one of all the sleepers who realized the danger of sleeping in 
an open shed? Had the victim's fear in some inexplicable way 
conveyed itself to the man-eater, and attracted him to her? 

It was not long after this occurrence that the pundit had his 



own encounter with the man-eater. The exact date— which 
could if desired be ascertained from the hospital records at 
Rudraprayag— is immaterial, and for the purpose of my story it 
will be sufficient to say that it took place during the hottest 
part of the summer of 1921, that is four years before I met 
the pundit. Late one evening of that summer ten pilgrims from 
Madras arrived weary and footsore at Golabrai, and expressed 
their intention of spending the night in the pilgrim shelter. 
Fearing that if any more people were killed at Golabrai his 
shelter would get a bad reputation, the pundittried to persuade 
them to continue on for another two miles to Rudraprayag, 
where they would be ensured of safe accommodation. Finding 
that nothing he could say had any effect on the tired pilgrims, 
he finally consented to give them accommodation in his house, 
which was fifty yards above the mango-tree to which I have 
already drawn attention. 

The pundit's house was built on the same plan as the 
homesteads at Bhainswara; a low ground-floor room used for 
storage of fuel, and a first-floor room used as a residence. A 
short flight of stone steps gave access to a narrow veranda, the 
door of the residential room being opposite to the landing at 
the top of the steps. 

After the pundit and the ten guests that had been forced on 
him had eaten their evening meal, they locked themselves into 
the room, which was not provided with any means of 
ventilation. The heat in the room was stifling, and fearing that 
he would be suffocated the pundit some time during the night 
opened the door, stepped outside, and stretched his hands to 
the pillars on either side of the steps supporting the roof of the 
veranda. As he did so and filled his lungs with the night air, his 
throat was gripped as in a vice. Retaining his hold on the 
pillars, he got the soles of his feet against the body of his 
assailant and with a desperate kick tore the leopard's teeth 
from his throat, and hurled it down the steps. Then, fearing 
that he was going to faint, he took a step sideways and 
supported himself by putting both hands on the railing of the 



veranda, and the moment he did so the leopard sprang up from 
below and buried its claws in his left forearm. The downward 
pull was counteracted by the railing on which the pundit had 
the palm of his hand, and the weight of the leopard caused its 
sharp claws to rip through the flesh of his arm until they tore 
free at his wrist. Before the leopard was able to spring a 
second time, the pilgrims, hearing the terrifying sounds 
the pundit was making in his attempts to breathe through the 
gap torn in his throat, dragged him into the room and bolted 
the door. For the rest of that long hot night the pundit lay 
gasping for breath and bleeding profusely, while the leopard 
growled and clawed at the frail door, and the pilgrims 
screamed with terror. 

At daylight the pilgrims carried the pundit, now mercifully 
unconscious, to a Kalakamli hospital at Rudraprayag, where for 
three months he was fed through a silver tube inserted in his 
throat. After an absence of over six months he returned to his 
home in Golabrai, broken in health and with his hair turned 
grey. Photographs were taken five years later, and scarcely 
show the leopard's teeth-marks on the left side of 
the pundit's face and in his throat, and its claw-marks on his 
left arm, though they were still clearly visible. 

In his conversations with me the pundit always referred to the 
man-eater as an evil spirit, and after the first day, when he had 
asked me what proof I could give him in face of his own 
experience that evil spirits could not assume material form, I 
also, to humour him, referred to the man-eater as 'the evil 
spirit'. 

On arrival at Golabrai that evening I told the pundit of my 
fruitless visit to Bhainswara, and warned him to take extra 
precautions for his safety and for the safety of any pilgrims who 
might be staying in his shelter; for the evil spirit, after its long 
excursion into the hills, had now returned to the vicinity. 

That night, and for the following three nights, I sat on the 
haystack, keeping a watch on the road; and on the fourth day 



Ibbotson returned from Pauri. 


Ibbotson always infused new life into me, for his creed, like 
that of the locals, was that no one was to blame if the man- 
eater had not died yesterday, for surely it would die today or 
maybe tomorrow. I had a lot to tell him, for though I had 
corresponded with him regularly— extracts from my letters 
being embodied in his reports to the Government, and by them 
made available to the press— I had not been able to give him 
all the details which he was now eager to hear. On his part 
Ibbotson also had a lot to tell me; this concerned the clamour 
being made in the press for the destruction of the man-eater, 
and the suggestion that sportsmen from all parts of India be 
encouraged to go to Garhwal to assist in killing the leopard. 
This press campaign had resulted in Ibbotson receiving only 
one inquiry, and only one suggestion. The inquiry was from a 
sportsman who said that, if arrangements for his travel, 
accommodation, food, and so on, were made to his satisfaction, 
he would consider whether it was worth his while to come to 
Golabrai; and the suggestion was from a sportsman in whose 
opinion the speediest and easiest way of killing the leopard was 
to paint a goat over with arsenic, sew up its mouth to prevent it 
licking itself, and then tie it up in a place where the leopard 
would find and eat it, and so poison itself. 

We talked long that day, reviewing my many failures in 
minutest detail, and by lunch-time, when I had told Ibbotson of 
the leopard's habit of going down the road between 
Rudraprayag and Golabrai on an average once in every five 
days, I convinced him that the only hope I now had of shooting 
the leopard was by sitting over the road for ten nights, for, as I 
pointed out to him, the leopard would be almost certain to use 
the road at least once during the period. Ibbotson consented to 
my plan very reluctantly, for I had already sat up many nights 
and he was afraid that another ten on end would be too much 
for me. However, I carried my point, and then told Ibbotson 
that if I did not succeed in killing the leopard within the 
stipulated time, I would return to Naini Tal and leave the field 



free for any new-comers who might consider it worth their 
while to take my place. 

That evening Ibbotson accompanied me to Golabrai and helped 
me to put up a machan in the mango tree a hundred yards from 
the pilgrim shelter and fifty yards below the pundit's house. 
Immediately below the tree, and in the middle of the road, we 
drove a stout wooden peg, and to this peg we tethered a goat 
with a small bell round its neck. The moon was nearly at its 
full; even so, the high hill to the east of Golabrai only admitted 
of the moon lighting up the deep Ganges valley for a few hours, 
and if the leopard came while it was dark the goat would warn 
me of his approach. 

When all our preparations had been made Ibbotson returned to 
the bungalow, promising to send two of my men for me early 
next morning. While I sat on a rock near the foot of the tree 
and smoked and waited for night to close in, the pundit came 
and sat down beside me; he was a bhakti and did not smoke. 
Earlier in the evening he had seen us building the machan, and 
he now tried to dissuade me from sitting all night in the tree 
when I could sleep comfortably in bed. Nevertheless, I assured 
him I would sit all that night in the tree, and for nine nights 
thereafter, for if I was not able to kill the evil spirit I could at 
least guard his house and the pilgrim shelter from attack by all 
enemies. Once during the night a kakar barked on the hill 
above me, but thereafter the night was silent. At sunrise next 
morning two of my men arrived, and I set off for the Inspection 
Bungalow, examining the road as I went for pug-marks, and 
leaving the men to follow with my rug and rifle. 

During the following nine days my programme did not vary. 
Leaving the bungalow accompanied by two men in the early 
evening, I took up my position in the machan and sent the men 
away in time for them to get back to the bungalow before dusk. 
The men had strict orders not to leave the bungalow before it 
was fully light, and they arrived each morning as the sun was 
rising on the hills on the far side of the river and accompanied 



me back to the bungalow. 

During all those ten nights the barking of the kakar on the first 
night was all that I heard. That the man-eater was still in the 
vicinity we had ample proof, for twice within those ten nights it 
had broken into houses and carried off, on the first occasion, a 
goat and, on the second occasion, a sheep. I found both kills 
with some difficulty for they had been carried a long distance, 
but neither had been of any use to me as they had been eaten 
out. Once also during those ten nights the leopard had broken 
down the door of a house which, fortunately for the inmates, 
had two rooms, the door of the inner room being sufficiently 
strong to withstand the leopard's onslaught. 

On return to the bungalow after my tenth night in the mango 
tree, Ibbotson and I discussed our future plans. No further 
communications had been received from the sportsman, no one 
else had expressed a desire to accept the Government's 
invitation, and no one had responded to the appeals made by 
the press. Neither Ibbotson nor I could afford to spend more 
time at Rudraprayag; Ibbotson because he had been away from 
his headguarters for ten days and it was necessary for him to 
return to Pauri to attend to urgent work; and I because I had 
work to do in Africa and had delayed my departure for three 
months and could not delay it any longer. Both of us were 
reluctant to leave Garhwal to the tender mercies of the man- 
eater and yet, situated as we were, it was hard to decide what 
to do. One solution was for Ibbotson to apply for leave, and for 
me to cancel my passage to Africa and cut my losses. We finally 
agreed to leave the decision over for that night, and to decide 
on our line of action next morning. Having come to this 
decision I told Ibbotson I would spend my last night in Garhwal 
in the mango tree. 

Ibbotson accompanied me on that eleventh, and last, evening, 
and as we approached Golabrai we saw a number of men 
standing on the side of the road, looking down into a field a 
little beyond the mango tree; the men had not seen us and 



before we got up to them they turned and moved off towards 
the pilgrim shelter. One of them however looked back, and 
seeing me beckoning retraced his steps. In answer to our 
questions he said he and his companions had for an hour been 
watching a great fight between two big snakes down in the 
field. No crops appeared to have been grown there for a year 
or more, and the snakes had last been seen near the big rock in 
the middle of the field. There were smears of blood on this 
rock, and the man said they had been made by the snakes, 
which had bitten each other and were bleeding in several 
places. Having broken a stick from a nearby bush, I jumped 
down into the field to see if there were any holes near the rock, 
and as I did so I caught sight of the snakes in a bush just below 
the road. Ibbotson had in the meantime armed himself with a 
stout stick, and as one of the snakes tried to climb up on to the 
road he killed it. The other one disappeared into a hole in the 
bank from where we were unable to dislodge it. The snake 
Ibbotson had killed was about seven feet long and of a uniform 
light straw colour, and on its neck it had several bites. It was 
not a rat snake, and as it had very pronounced poison fangs we 
concluded it was some variety of hoodless cobra. Cold-blooded 
creatures are not immune to snake poison, for I have seen a 
frog bitten by a cobra die in a few minutes, but I do not know if 
snakes of the same variety can poison each other, and the one 
that escaped into the hole may have died in a few minutes or it 
may have lived to die of old age. 

After Ibbotson left, the pundit passed under my tree on his way 
to the pilgrim shelter, carrying a pail of milk. He informed me 
that a hundred and fifty pilgrims, who had arrived during the 
day, were determined to spend the night in his shelter and that 
he was powerless to do anything about it. It was then too late 
for me to take any action, so I told him to warn the pilgrims to 
keep close together and not on any account to move about after 
dark. When he hurried back to his house a few minutes later, 
he said he had warned the pilgrims accordingly. 

In a field adjoining the road, and about a hundred yards from 



my tree, there was a thorn enclosure in which a packman— not 
my old friend— earlier in the evening had penned his flock of 
goats and sheep. With the packman were two dogs who had 
barked very fiercely at us as we came down the road, and at 
Ibbotson after he left me to go back to the bungalow. 

The moon was a few days past the full, and the valley was in 
darkness when, a little after 9 p.m., I saw a man carrying a 
lantern leave the pilgrim shelter and cross the road. A minute 
or two later, he recrossed the road and on gaining the shelter 
extinguished the lantern and at the same moment the 
packman's dogs started barking furiously. The dogs were 
unmistakably barking at a leopard, which quite possibly had 
seen the man with the lantern and was now coming down the 
road on its way to the shelter. 

At first the dogs barked in the direction of the road, but after a 
little while they turned and barked in my direction. The leopard 
had now quite evidently caught sight of the sleeping goat and 
lain down out of sight of the dogs— which had stopped barking 
— to consider his next move. I knew that the leopard had 
arrived, and I also knew that he was using my tree to stalk the 
goat, and the question that was tormenting me as the long 
minutes dragged by was whether he would skirt round the goat 
and kill one of the pilgrims, or whether he would kill the goat 
and give me a shot. 

During all the nights I had sat in the tree I adopted a position 
that would enable me to discharge my rifle with the minimum 
of movement and in the minimum of time. The distance 
between the goat and my machanwas about twenty feet, but 
the night was so dark under the dense foliage of the tree that 
my straining eyes could not penetrate even this short distance, 
so I closed them and concentrated on my hearing. 

My rifle, to which I had a small electric torch attached, was 
pointing in the direction of the goat, and I was just beginning 
to think that the leopard—assuming it was the man-eater- 
had reached the shelter and was selecting a human victim. 



when there was a rush from the foot of the tree, and the goat's 
bell tinkled sharply. Pressing the button of the torch I saw that 
the sights of the rifle were aligned on the shoulder of a leopard, 
and without having to move the rifle a fraction of an inch I 
pressed the trigger, and as I did so the torch went out. 

Torches in those days were not in as general use as they are 
now, and mine was the first I had ever possessed. I had carried 
it for several months and never had occasion to use it, and I did 
not know the life of the battery, or that it was necessary to test 
it. When I pressed the button on this occasion the torch gave 
only one dim flash and then went out, and I was again in 
darkness without knowing what the result of my shot had been. 

The echo of my shot was dying away in the valley when 
the pundit opened his door and called out to ask if I needed any 
help. I was at the time listening with all my ears for any sounds 
that might come from the leopard, so I did not answer him, and 
he hurriedly shut his door. 

The leopard had been lying across the road with his head away 
from me when I fired, and I was vaguely aware of his having 
sprung over the goat and gone down the hillside, and just 
before the pundit had called I thought I heard what may have 
been a gurgling sound, but of this I could not be sure. The 
pilgrims had been aroused by my shot but, after murmuring for 
a few minutes, they resumed their sleep. The goat appeared to 
be unhurt, for from the sound of his bell I could tell that he was 
moving about and apparently eating the grass of which he was 
given a liberal supply each night. 

I had fired my shot at 10 p.m. As the moon was not due to rise 
for several hours, and as there was nothing I could do in the 
meantime, I made myself comfortable, and listened and 
smoked. 

Hours later the moon lit up the crest of the hills on the far side 
of the Ganges and slowly crept down into the valley, and a little 
later I saw it rise over the top of the hill behind me. As soon as 



it was overhead I climbed to the top of the tree, but found that 
the spreading branches impeded my view. Descending again to 
the machan, I climbed out on the branches spreading over the 
road, but from here also I found it was not possible to see down 
the hillside in the direction in which I thought the leopard had 
gone. It was then 3 a.m., and two hours later the moon began 
to pale. When nearby objects became visible in the light of the 
day that was being born in the east, I descended from the tree 
and was greeted by a friendly bleat from the goat. 

Beyond the goat, and at the very edge of the road, there was a 
long low rock, and on this rock there was an inch-wide streak 
of blood; the leopard from which that blood had come could 
only have lived a minute or two, so dispensing with the 
precautions usually taken when following up the blood trail of 
carnivores, I scrambled down off the road and, taking up the 
trail on the far side of the rock, followed it for fifty yards, to 
where the leopard was lying dead. He had slid backwards into 
a hole in the ground, in which he was now lying crouched up, 
with his chin resting on the edge of the hole. 

No marks by which I could identify the dead animal were 
visible, even so I never for one moment doubted that the 
leopard in the hole was the man-eater. But here was no fiend, 
who while watching me through the long night hours had 
rocked and rolled with silent fiendish laughter at my vain 
attempts to outwit him, and licked his lips in anticipation of the 
time when, finding me off my guard for one brief moment, he 
would get the opportunity he was waiting for of burying his 
teeth in my throat. Here was only an old leopard, who differed 
from others of his kind in that his muzzle was grey and his lips 
lacked whiskers; the best-hated and the most feared animal in 
all India, whose only crime— not against the laws of nature, but 
against the laws of man— was that he had shed human blood, 
with no object of terrorizing man, but only in order that he 
might live; and who now, with his chin resting on the rim of the 
hole and his eyes half-closed, was peacefully sleeping his long 
last sleep. 



While I stood unloading my rifle, one bullet from which had 
more than cancelled my personal score against the sleeper, I 
heard a cough, and on looking up saw the pundit peering down 
at me from the edge of the road. I beckoned to him and he 
came gingerly down the hill. On catching sight of the leopard's 
head he stopped, and asked in a whisper whether it was dead, 
and what it was. When I told him it was dead, and that it was 
the evil spirit that had torn open his throat five years ago, and 
for fear of which he had hurriedly closed his door the previous 
night, he put his hands together and attempted to put his head 
on my feet. Next minute there was a call from the road above 
of, 'Sahib, where are you?' It was one of my men calling in 
great agitation, and when I sent an answering call echoing over 
the Ganges, four heads appeared, and catching sight of us four 
men came helter-skelter down the hill, one of them swinging a 
lighted lantern which he had forgotten to extinguish. 

The leopard had got stiff in the hole and was extracted with 
some little difficulty. While it was being tied to the stout 
bamboo pole the men had brought with them, they told me they 
had been unable to sleep that night and that as soon 
as Ibbotson's jemadar's watch showed them it was 4.30 a.m., 
they lit the lantern, and arming themselves with a pole and a 
length of rope had come to look for me, for they felt that I was 
in urgent need of them. Not finding me in the machan and 
seeing the goat unhurt, and the streak of blood on the rock, 
they concluded the man-eater had killed me, and not knowing 
what to do they had in desperation called to me. 

Leaving the pundit to retrieve my rug from the machan, and 
give the pilgrims who were now crowding round his version of 
the night's happenings, the four men and I, with the goat 
trotting alongside, set off for the Inspection Bungalow. The 
goat, who had escaped with very little injury owing to my 
having fired the moment the leopard caught him, little knew 
that his night's adventure was to make him a hero for the rest 
of his life, and that he was to wear a fine brass collar and be a 
source of income to the man from whom I had purchased him. 



and to whom I gave him back. 

Ibbotson was still asleep when I knocked on the glazed door, 
and the moment he caught sight of me he jumped out of bed 
and dashing to the door flung it open, embraced me, and next 
minute was dancing round the leopard which the men had 
deposited on the veranda. Shouting for tea, and a hot bath for 
me, he called for his stenographer and dictated telegrams to 
the Government, the press, and my sister, and a cable to Jean. 
Not one question had he asked, for he knew that the leopard 
which I had brought home at that early hour was the man- 
eater, so what need was there for questions? On that previous 
occasion— in spite of all the evidence that had been produced 
— I had maintained that the leopard killed in the gin-trap was 
not the man-eater, and on this occasion I had said nothing. 

Ibbotson had carried a heavy responsibility since October of 
the previous year, for to him was left the answering of 
questions of Councillors anxious to please their constituents, of 
Government officials who were daily getting more alarmed at 
the mounting death-roll, and of a press that was clamouring for 
results. His position had for a long time been like that of the 
head of a police force who, knowing the identity of a noted 
criminal, was unable to prevent his committing further crimes, 
and for this was being badgered on all sides. Little wonder then 
that Ibbotson on that 2nd of May 1926 was the happiest man I 
had even seen, for not only was he now able to inform all 
concerned that the criminal had been executed, but he was 
also able to tell the people from the bazaars, and from the 
surrounding villages, and the pilgrims, all the whom were 
swarming into the compound of the Inspection Bungalow, that 
the evil spirit that had tormented them for eight long years was 
now dead. 

After emptying a pot of tea and having a hot bath I tried to get 
a little sleep, but fear of a repetition of the cramps that twisted 
my feet, and from which I was only relieved by the vigorous 
ministrations of Ibbotson, brought me out of bed. Then 



Ibbotson and I measured the leopard, and carefully examined 
it. The following are the results of our measurements and of 
our examination. 

MEASUREMENTS 

Length, between pegs 7 feet, 6 inches 
Length, over curves 7 feet, 10 inches 

[Note: these measurements were taken after the leopard had 
been dead twelve hours.] 

DESCRIPTION 

Colour. Light straw. 

Hair: Short and brittle. 

Whiskers: None. 

Teeth: Worn and discoloured, one canine tooth broken. 

Tongue and mouth: Black. 

Wounds: One fresh bullet-wound in right shoulder. 

One old bullet-wound in pad of left hind foot, and part of one 
toe and one claw missing from same foot. 

Several deep and partly-healed cuts on head. 

One deep and partly-healed cut on right hind leg. 

Several partly-healed cuts on tail. 

One partly-healed wound on stifle of left hind leg. 

I am unable to account for the leopard's tongue and mouth 
being black. It was suggested that this might have been caused 
by cyanide, but whether this was so or not I cannot say. Of the 
partly-healed wounds, those on the head, right hind leg, and 
tail were acquired in his fight at Bhainswara, and the one on 
the stifle of his left hind leg was the result of his having been 
caught in the gin-trap, for the piece of skin and tuft of hair we 



found in the trap fitted into this wound. The injuries on the left 
hind foot were the result of the bullet fired on the bridge by the 
young army officer in 1921. When skinning the leopard later, I 
found a pellet of buckshot embedded in the skin of his chest 
which an Indian Christian— years later— claimed he had fired 
at the leopard the year it became a man-eater. 

After Ibbotson and I had measured and examined the leopard it 
was laid in the shade of a tree, and throughout the day 
thousands of men, women, and children came to see it. 

When the people of our hills visit an individual for any 
particular purpose, as for instance to show their gratitude or to 
express their thanks, it is customary for them not to go on their 
mission empty-handed. A rose, a marigold, or a few petals of 
either flower, suffices, and the gift is proffered in hands cupped 
together. When the recipient has touched the gift with the tips 
of the fingers of his right hand, the person proffering the gift 
goes through the motion of pouring the gift on to the 
recipient's feet, in the same manner as if his cupped hands 
contained water. 

I have on other occasions witnessed gratitude, but never as I 
witnessed it that day at Rudraprayag, first at the Inspection 
Bungalow and later at a reception in the bazaar. 

'He killed our only son, sahib, and we being old, our house is 
now desolate.' 

'He ate the mother of my five children, and the youngest is but 
a few months old, and there is none in the home now to care 
for the children, or to cook the food.' 

'My son was taken ill at night and no one dared go to the 
hospital for medicine, and so he died. 1 

Tragedy upon pitiful tragedy, and while I listened, the ground 
around my feet was strewn with flowers. 



Epilogue 

THE EVENTS I HAVE NARRATED TOOK place between 1925 
and 1926. Sixteen years later, in 1942, I was doing a war job in 
Meerut and my sister and I were invited one day by Colonel 
Flye to help entertain wounded men at a garden party The 
men, some fifty or sixty in number, and from all parts of India, 
were sitting round a tennis-court just finishing a sumptuous 
tea, and getting to the smoking stage, when we arrived. Taking 
opposite sides of the court, my sister and I started to go round 
the circle. 

The men were all from the Middle East, and, after a rest, were 
to be sent to their homes, some on leave, and some on 
discharge. 

Music, in the form of a gramophone with Indian records, had 
been provided by Mrs Flye, and as my sister and I had been 
requested to stay until the party gave over— which would be in 
about two hours' time— we had ample time to make our circuit 
of the wounded men. 

I had got about half-way round the circle when I came to a boy 
sitting in a low chair; he had been grievously wounded, and on 
the ground near his chair were two crutches. At my approach 
he very painfully slid off his chair and attempted to put his 
head on my feet. He was woefully light, for he had spent many 
months in hospital, and when I had picked him up and made 
him comfortable in his chair, he said: 'I have been talking with 
your lady sister, and when I told her I was a Garhwali, she told 
me who you were. I was a small boy when you shot the man- 
eater, and as our village is far from Rudraprayag I was not able 
to walk there, and my father not being strong was unable to 
carry me, so I had to stay at home. When my father returned he 
told me he had seen the man-eater, and that with his own eyes 
he had seen the sahib who had shot it. He also told me of the 
sweets that had been distributed that day— his share of which 
he had brought back for me— and of the great crowds he had 
seen. And now, sahib, I will go back to my home with great joy 



in my heart, for I shall be able to tell my father that with my 
own eyes I have seen you and, may be, if I can get anyone to 
carry me to the fair that is held every year at Rudraprayag to 
commemorate the death of the man-eater, I shall tell all the 
people I meet there that I have seen and had speech with you. 1 

A cripple, on the threshold of manhood, returning from the 
wars with a broken body, with no thought of telling of brave 
deeds done, but only eager to tell his father that with his own 
eyes he had seen the man who years ago he had not had the 
opportunity of seeing, a man whose only claim to remembrance 
was that he had fired one accurate shot. 

A typical son of Garhwal, of that simple and hardy hill-folk; and 
of that greater India, whose sons only those few who live 
among them are privileged to know. It is these big-hearted sons 
of the soil, no matter what their caste or creed, who will one 
day weld the contending factions into a composite whole, and 
make of India a great nation. 


-END- 



BOOK FOUR: 

MY TNDTA 




Dedication 

If you are looking for a history of India, or for an account of the 
rise and fall of the British raj, or for the reason for the cleaving 
of the subcontinent into two mutually antagonistic parts and 
the effect this mutilation will have on the respective sections, 
and ultimately on Asia, you will not find it in these pages; for 
though I have spent a lifetime in the country, I lived too near 
the seat of events, and was too intimately associated with the 
actors, to get the perspective needed for the impartial 
recording of these matters. 

In my India, the India I know, there are four hundred million 
people, ninety percent of whom are simple, honest, brave, 
loyal, hard-working souls whose daily prayer to God, and to 
whatever Government is in power, is to give them security of 
life and of property to enable them to enjoy the fruits of their 
labors. It is of these people, who are admittedly poor, and who 
are often described as 'India's starving millions', among whom I 
have lived and whom I love, that I shall endeavor to tell in the 
pages of this book, which I humbly dedicate to my friends, the 
poor of India. 



Introduction 

HAVING read my dedication you may ask: 'Who are these poor 
of India that you mention?' 'What do you mean by "My India"?' 
The questions are justified. The world has developed the habit 
of using the word 'Indian' to denote an inhabitant of the great 
peninsula that stretches upwards of two thousand miles from 
north to south, and as much from east to west. Geographically 
the term may pass muster, but when it comes to applying it to 
the people themselves one should not, without further 
explanation, use a description whose looseness has already led 
to infinite misunderstanding. The four hundred million people 
of India are divided horizontally by race, tribe, and caste into a 
far greater diversity than exists in Europe, and they are cleft 
vertically by religious differences fully as deep as those which 
under any one nation from another. It was religion, not race 
that split the Indian Empire into Hindustan and Pakistan. 

Let me; therefore, explain what I mean by the title of this book. 

'My India', about which these sketches of village life and work 
are written, refers to those portions of a vast land which I have 
known from my earliest days, and where I have worked; and 
the simple folk whose ways and characters I have tried to 
depict for you are those among whom I spent the greater part 
of seventy years. Look at a map of India. Pick out Cape 
Comorin, the most southerly point of the peninsula, and run 
your eye straight up to where the Gangetic Plain slopes up into 
the foothills of the Himalayas in the north of the United 
Provinces. There you will find the hill station of Naini Tal, the 
summer seat of the Government of the United Provinces, 
packed from April to November with Europeans and wealthier 
Indians seeking escape from the heat of the plains, and 
occupied during the winter only by a few permanent residents, 
of whom most of my life I was one. Now leave this hill station 
and run your eye down the Ganges River on its way to the sea, 
past Allahabad, Benares, and Patna, till you reach Mokameh 
Ghat, where I labored for twenty-one years. The scenes of my 



sketches centre round these two points in India: Naini Tal and 
Mokameh Ghat. 

In addition to many footpaths, Naini Tal is accessible by a 
motor road of which we are justly proud, for it has the 
reputation of being the best-aligned and the best-maintained 
hill road in India. Starting at the railway terminus of 
Kathgodam the road, in its course of twenty-two miles, passes 
through forests where occasionally tiger and the dread 
hamadryad are to be seen, and climbs 4,500 feet by easy 
gradients to Naini Tal. Naini Tal can best be described as an 
open valley running east and west, surrounded on three sides 
by hills, the highest of which, Cheena, rises to a height of 8,569 
feet. 

It is open at the end from which the motor road approaches it. 
Nestling in the valley is a lake a little more than two miles in 
circumference, fed at the upper end by a perennial spring and 
overflowing at the other end where the motor road terminates. 
At the upper and lower ends of the valley there are bazaars, 
and the surrounding wooded hills are dotted with residential 
houses, churches, schools, clubs, and hotels. Near the margin 
of the lake are boat houses, a picturesque Hindu temple, and a 
very sacred rock shrine presided over by an old Brahmin priest 
who has been a lifelong friend of mine. 

Geologists differ in their opinion as to the origin of the lake, 
some attributing it to glaciers and landslides, others to volcanic 
action. Hindu legends, however, give the credit for the lake to 
three ancient sages, Atri, Pulastyas and Pulaha. The sacred 
book Skanda-Puran tells how, while on a penitential pilgrimage, 
these three sages arrived at the crest of Cheena and, finding no 
water to quench their thirst, dug a hole at the foot of the hill 
and syphoned water into it from Manasarowar, the sacred lake 
in Tibet, After the departure of the sages the goddess Naini 
arrived and took up her abode in the waters of the lake. In 
course of time forests grew on the sides of the excavation and, 
attracted by the water and the vegetation, birds and animals in 



great numbers made their home in the valley. Within a radius of 
four miles of the goddess's temple I have, in addition to other 
animals, seen tiger, leopard, bear, and sambhar, and in the 
same area identified one hundred and twenty-eight varieties of 
birds. Rumours of the existence of the lake reached the early 
administrators of this part of India, and as the hill people were 
unwilling to disclose the position of their sacred lake, one of 
these administrators, in the year 1839, hit on the ingenious 
plan of placing a large stone on the head of a hill man, telling 
him he would have to carry it until he arrived at goddess 
Naini's lake. After wandering over the hills for many days the 
man eventually got tired of carrying the stone, and led the 
party who were following him to the lake. The stone alleged to 
have been carried by the man was shown to me when I was a 
small boy, and when I marked that it was a very big stone for a 
man to carry— it weighed about six hundred pounds— the hill 
man who showed it to me said, 'Yes, it is a big stone, but you 
must remember that in those days our people were very 
strong'. 

Provide yourself now with a good pair of field glasses and 
accompany me to the top of Cheena. From here you will get a 
bird's-eye view of the country surrounding Naini Tal. The road 
is steep, but if you are interested in birds, trees, and flowers 
you will not mind the three-mile climb and if you arrive at the 
top thirsty, as the three sages did, I will show you a crystal- 
clear spring of coldwater to quench your thirst. Having rested 
and eaten your lunch, turn now to the north. Immediately 
below you is a deep well-wooded valley running down to the 
Kosi River. Beyond the river are a number of parallel ridges 
with villages dotted here and there; on one of these ridges is 
the town of Almora, and on another, the cantonment of 
Ranikhet. Beyond these again are more ridges, the highest of 
which, Dungar Buqual, rises to a height of 14,200 feet and is 
dwarfed into insignificance by the mighty mass of the snow- 
clad Himalayas. 

Sixty miles due north of you, as the crow flies, is Trisul, and to 



the east and to the west of this imposing 23,406-foot peak the 
snow mountains stretch in an unbroken line for many hundreds 
of miles. Where the snows fade out of sight to the west of Trisul 
are first the Gangotri group, then the glaciers and mountains 
above the sacred shrines of Kedarnath and Badrinath, and then 
Kamet made famous by Smythe. 

To the east of Trisul, and set farther back, you can just see the 
top of Nanda Devi (25,689 feet), the highest mountain in India. 
To your right front is Nanda Kot, the spotless pillow of the 
goddess Parvati, and a little farther east are the beautiful peaks 
of Panch Chuli, the 'five cooking-places' used by the Pan-davas 
while on their way to Kailas in Tibet. At the first approach of 
dawn, while Cheena and the intervening hills are still shrouded 
in the mantle of night, the snowy range changes from indigo 
blue to rose pink, and as the sun touches the peaks nearest to 
heaven the pink gradually changes to dazzling white. During 
the day the mountains show up cold and white, each crest 
trailing a feather of powdered snow, and in the setting sun the 
scene may be painted pink, gold, or red according to the fancy 
of heaven's artist. 

Turn your back now on the snows and face south. At the limit of 
your range of vision you will see three cities: Bareilly, Kashipur, 
and Moradabad. These three cities, the nearest of which, 
Kashipur, is some fifty miles as the crow flies, are on the main 
railway that runs between Calcutta and the Punjab. There are 
three belts of country between the railway and the foothills: 
first a cultivated belt some twenty miles wide, then a grass belt 
ten miles wide known as the Terai, and third a tree belt ten 
miles wide known as the Bhabar. In the Bhabar belt, which 
extends right up to the foothills, clearings have been made, and 
on this rich fertile soil, watered by many streams, villages of 
varying size have been established. The nearest group of 
villages, Kaladhungi, is fifteen miles from Naini Tal by road, 
and at the upper end of this group you will see our village, 

Choti Haldwani, surrounded by a three-mile-long stone wall. 
Only the roof of our cottage, which is at the junction of the road 



running down from Naini Tal with the road skirting the 
foothills, is visible in a group of big trees. The foothills in this 
area are composed almost entirely of iron ore, and it was at 
Kaladhungi that iron was first smelted in northern India. The 
fuel used was wood, and as the King of Kumaon, General Sir 
Henry Ramsay, feared that the furnaces would consume all the 
forests in the Bhabar, he closed down the: foundries. Between 
Kaladhungi and your seat on Cheena the low hills are densely 
wooded with sal, the trees which supply our railways with ties, 
or sleepers, and in the nearest fold of the ridge nestles the 
little lake of Khurpa Tal, surrounded by fields on which the best 
potatoes in India are grown. 

Away in the distance, to the right, you can see the sun glinting 
on the Ganges, and to the left you can see it glinting on the 
Sarda; the distance between these two rivers where they leave 
the foot hills is roughly two hundred miles. 

Now turn to the east and before you in the near and middle 
distance you will see the country described in old gazetteers as 
'the district of sixty lakes'. Many of these takes have silted up, 
some in my lifetime and the only ones of any size that now 
remain are Naini Tal, Sat Tal, Bhim Tal, and Nakuchia Tal. 
Beyond Nakuchia Tal is the cone-shaped hill, Choti Kailas. The 
gods do not favour the killing of bird or beast on this sacred 
hill, and the last man who disregarded their wishes— a soldier 
on leave during the war— unaccountably lost his footing after 
killing a mountain goat and, in full view of his two companions, 
fell a thousand feet into the valley below. 

Beyond Choti Kailas is the Kala Agar ridge on which I hunted 
the Chowgarh man-eating tiger for two years, and beyond this 
ridge the mountains of Nepal fade out of sight. Turn now to the 
west. But first it will be necessary for you to descend a few 
hundred feet and take up a new position on Deopatta, a rocky 
peak 7,991 feet high adjoining Cheena. Immediately below you 
is a deep, wide, and densely wooded valley which starts on the 
saddle between Cheena and Deopatta and extends through 



Dachouri to Kaladhungi. It is richer in flora and fauna than any 
other in the Himalayas, and beyond this beautiful valley the 
hills extend in an unbroken line up to the Ganges, the waters of 
which you can see glinting m the sun over a hundred miles 
away On the far side of the Ganges are the Siwalik range of 
hills— hills that were old before the mighty Himalayas were 
born. 



I - The Queen of the Village 

COME with me now to one of the villages you saw in your 
bird's-eye view from the top of Cheena. The parallel lines you 
saw etched across the face of the hill are terraced fields. Some 
of these are no more than ten feet wide, and the stone walls 
supporting them are in some cases thirty feet high. The 
ploughing of these narrow fields, with a steep hill on one side 
and a big drop on the other, is a difficult and a dangerous job, 
and is only made possible by the use of a plough with a short 
shaft and of cattle that have been bred on the hills and that are 
in consequence small and stocky, and as sure-footed as goats. 
The stout hearted people, who with infinite labour have made 
these terraced fields, live in a row of stone houses with slate 
roofs bordering the rough and narrow road that runs from the 
Bhabar, and the plains beyond, to the inner Himalayas. The 
people in this village know me, for in response to an urgent 
telegram, which the whole village subscribed to send me, and 
which was carried by runner to Naini Tal for transmission, I 
once came hot-foot from Mokameh Ghat, where I was working, 
to rid them of a man-eating tiger. 

The incident which necessitated the sending of the telegram 
took place at mid day in a field just above the row of houses. A 
woman and her twelve-year-old daughter were reaping wheat 
when a tiger suddenly appeared. As the girl attempted to run 
to her mother for protection the tiger struck at her, severed her 
head from her body, and catching the body in mid-air bounded 
away into the jungle adjoining the field, leaving the head near 
the mother's feet. Telegrams, even urgent ones, take long in 
transmission, and as I had to do a journey of a thousand miles 
by rail and road, and the last twenty miles on foot, a week 
elapsed between the sending of the telegram and my arrival at 
the village; and in the meantime the tiger made another kill. 

The victim on this occasion was a woman who, with her 
husband and children, had lived for years in the compound of 
the house adjoining our home in Naini Tal. This woman, in 



company with several others, was cutting grass on the hill 
above the village when she was attacked by the tiger, killed, 
and carried off in full view of her companions. The screams of 
the frightened women were heard in the village, and, while the 
women were running back to Naini Tal to report the tragedy, 
the men of the village assembled and with great gallantry 
drove away the tiger. Knowing— with an Indian's trust— that I 
would respond to the telegram they had sent me, they wrapped 
the body in a blanket and tied it to the topmost branch of a 
thirty-foot rhododendron tree. From the tiger's subsequent 
actions it was evident that he had been lying up close by and 
had watched these proceedings, for if he had not seen the body 
being put up in a tree he would never have found it, as tigers 
have no sense of smell. 

When the women made their report in Naini Tal the husband of 
the dead woman came to my sister Maggie and told her of the 
killing of his wife, and at crack of dawn next morning Maggie 
sent out some of our men to make a machan over the kill and to 
sit on the machan until I came, for I was expected to arrive that 
day. Materials for making the machan were procured at the 
village and, accompanied by the villagers, my men proceeded 
to the rhododendron tree, where it was found that the tiger had 
climbed the tree, torn a hole in the blanket, and carried away 
the body. Again with commendable courage— for they were 
unarmed— the villagers and my men followed up the drag for 
half a mile; and on finding the partly eaten body they started to 
put up a machan in an oak tree immediately above it. Just as 
the machan was completed, a sportsman from Naini Tal, who 
was out on an all-day shoot, arrived quite by accident at the 
spot and, saying he was a friend of mine, he told my men to go 
away, as he would sit up for the tiger himself. So, while my men 
returned to Naini Tal to make their report to me— for I had 
arrived in the meantime— the sportsman, his gun bearer, and a 
man carrying his lunch basket and a lantern, took up their 
positions on the machan. 

There was no moon, and an hour after dark the gun-bearer 



asked the sportsman why he had allowed the tiger to carry 
away the kill, without firing at it. Refusing to believe that the 
tiger had been anywhere near the kill, the sportsman lit the 
lantern; and as he was letting it down on a length of string, to 
illuminate the ground, the string slipped through his fingers 
and the lantern crashed to the ground and caught fire. It was 
the month of May, when our forests are very dry, and with in a 
minute the dead grass and brushwood at the foot of the tree 
were burning fiercely. With great courage the sportsman 
shinned down the tree and attempted to beat out the flames 
with his tweed coat, until he suddenly remembered the man- 
eater and hurriedly climbed back to the machan. He left his 
coat, which was on fire, behind him. 

The illumination from the fire revealed the fact that the Kill 
was indeed gone, but the sportsman at this stage had lost all 
interest in kills and his anxiety now was for his own safety, and 
for the damage the fire would do to the Government forest. 
Fanned by a strong wind the fire receded from the vicinity of 
the tree and eight hours later a heavy downpour of rain and 
hail extinguished it, but not before it had burnt out several 
square miles of forest. It was the sportsman's first attempt to 
make contact with a man-eater and, after his experience of first 
nearly having been roasted and later having been frozen, it was 
also his last. Next morning, while he was making his weary way 
back to Naini Tal by one road, I was on my way out to the 
village by another, in ignorance of what had happened the 
previous night. 

At my request the villagers took me to the rhododendron tree 
and I was amazed to see how determined the tiger had been to 
regain possession of his kill. The torn blanket was some twenty- 
five feet from the ground, and the claw marks on the tree, the 
condition of the soft ground, and the broken brushwood at the 
foot of it, showed that the tiger had climbed and fallen off the 
tree at least twenty times before he eventually succeeded in 
tearing a hole in die blanket and removing the body. 



From this spot the tiger had carried the body half a mile, to the 
tree on which the machan had been built. Beyond this point the 
fire had obliterated all trace of a drag but, following on the line 
I thought the tiger would have taken, a mile farther on I 
stumbled on the charred head of the woman. A hundred yards 
beyond this spot there was heavy cover which the fire had not 
reached and for hours I searched this cover, right down to the 
foot of the valley five miles away, without, however, finding any 
trace of the tiger. 

(Five people lost their lives between the accidental arrivals of 
the sportsman at the machan, and the shooting of the tiger.) I 
arrived back in the village, after my fruitless search of the 
cover, late in the evening, and the wife of the headman 
prepared for me a meal which her daughters placed before me 
on brass plates. After a very generous, and a very welcome 
meal— for I had eaten nothing that day— I picked up the plates 
with the intention of washing them in a nearby spring. Seeing 
my intention the three girls ran forward and relieved me of the 
plates, saying, with a toss of their heads and a laugh, which it 
would not break their caste— they were Brahmins— to wash 
the plates from which the White Sadhu had eaten. 

The headman is dead now and his daughters have married and 
left the village, but his wife is alive, and you, who are 
accompanying me to the village, after your bird's-eye view from 
Cheena, must be prepared to drink the tea, not made with 
water but with rich fresh milk sweetened with jaggery, which 
she will brew for us. Our approach down the steep hillside 
facing the village has been observed and a small square of 
frayed carpet and two wicker chairs, reinforced with ghooral 
skins, have been set ready for us. Standing near these chairs to 
welcome us is the wife of the headman; there is no purdah here 
and she will not be embarrassed if you take a good look at her, 
and she is worth looking at. Her hair, snow-white now, was 
raven-black when I first knew her, and her cheeks, which in 
those far-off days had a bloom on them, are now ivory-white, 
without a single crease or wrinkle. Daughter of a hundred 



generations of Brahmins, her blood is as pure as that of the 
ancestor who founded her line. 

Pride of pure ancestry is inherent in all men, but nowhere is 
there greater respect for pure ancestry than there is in India. 
There are several different castes of people in the village this 
dear old lady administers, but her rule is never questioned and 
her word is law, not because of the strong arm of retainers, for 
of these she has none, but because she is a Brahmin, the salt of 
India's earth. 

The high prices paid in recent years for field produce have 
brought prosperity— as it is known in India— to this hill village, 
and of this prosperity our hostess has had her full share The 
string of fluted gold beads that she brought as part of her 
dowry are still round her neck, but the thin silver necklace has 
been deposited in the family bank, the hole in the ground under 
the cooking-place, and her neck is now encircled by a solid gold 
band. In the far-off days her ears were unadorned, but now she 
has number of thin gold rings in the upper cartilage, and from 
her nose hangs a gold ring five inches in diameter, the weight 
of which is partly carried by a thin gold chain looped over her 
right ear. Her dress is the same as that worn by all high-caste 
hill women: a shawl, a tight-fitting bodice of warm material, 
and a voluminous sprint skirt. Her feet are bare, for even in 
these advanced days the wearing of shoes among our hill folk 
denotes that the wearer is unchaste. 

The old lady has now retired to the inner recesses of her house 
to prepare tea, and while she is engaged on this pleasant task 
you can turn your attention to the bania's shop on the other 
side of the narrow road. The bania, too, is an old friend. Having 
greeted us and presented us with a packet of cigarettes he has 
gone back to squat cross-legged on the wooden platform on 
which his wares are exposed. These wares consist of the few 
articles that the village folk and wayfarers need in the way of 
atta, rice, dal, ghee, salt, stale sweets purchased at a discount 
in the Naini Tal bazaar, hill potatoes fit for the table of a king. 



enormous turnips so fierce that when eaten in public they make 
the onlookers' eyes water, cigarettes and matches, a tin of 
kerosene oil, and near the platform and within reach of his 
hand an iron pan in which milk is kept simmering throughout 
the day 

As the bania takes his seat on the platform his few customers 
gather in front of him. First is a small boy, accompanied by an 
even smaller sister, who is the proud possessor of one pice, all 
of which he is anxious to invest in sweets. Taking the pice from 
the small grubby hand the bania drops it into an open box. 

Then, waving his hand over the tray to drive away the wasps 
and flies, he picks up a square sweet made of sugar and curds, 
breaks it in half and puts a piece into each eager outstretched 
hand. 

Next comes a woman of the depressed class who has two annas 
to spend on her shopping. One anna is invested in atta, the 
coarse ground wheat that is the staple food of our hill folk, and 
two pice in the coarsest of the three qualities of dal exposed on 
the stall. With the remaining two pice she purchases a little salt 
and one of the fierce turnips and then, with a respectful salaam 
to the bania, for he is a man who commands respect, she 
hurries off to prepare the midday meal for her family. 

While the woman is being served the shrill whistles and shouts 
of men herald the approach of a string of pack mules, carrying 
cloth from the Moradabad hand looms to the markets in the 
interior of the hills. The sweating mules have had a stiff climb 
up the rough road from the foothills. A pice is worth about a 
farthing, but is itself made up of three smaller coins called pies. 
Four pice make an anna, sixteen annas a rupee and while they 
are having a breather the four men in charge have sat down on 
the bench provided by the bania for his customers and are 
treating themselves to a cigarette and a glass of milk. Milk is 
the strongest drink that has ever been served at this shop, or at 
any other of the hundreds of wayside shops throughout the 
hills, for, except for those few who have come in contact with 



what is called civilization, our hill men do not drink. 


Drinking among women, in my India, is unknown. No daily 
paper has ever found its way into this village, and the only 
news the inhabitants get of the outside world is from an 
occasional trip into Naini Tal and from wayfarers, the best- 
informed of whom are the packmen. On their way into the hills 
they bring news of the distant plains of India, and on their 
return journey a month or so later they have news from the 
trading centers where they sell their wares. 

The tea the old lady has prepared for us is now ready. You must 
be careful how you handle the metal cup filled to the brim, for 
it is hot enough to take the skin off your hands. Interest has 
now shifted from the packmen to us, and whether or not you 
like the sweet, hot liquid you must drink every drop of it, for 
the eyes of the entire village, whose guest you are, are on you; 
and to leave any dregs in your cup would mean that you did not 
consider the drink good enough for you. 

Others have attempted to offer recompense for hospitality but 
we will not make this mistake, for these simple and hospitable 
people are intensely proud, and it would be as great an insult 
to offer to pay the dear old lady for her cup of tea as it would 
have been to have offered to pay the bania for his packet of 
cigarettes. So, as we leave this village, which is only one of the 
many thousands of similar villages scattered over the vast area 
viewed through your good field glasses from the top of Cheena, 
where I have spent the best part of my life, you can be assured 
that the welcome we received on arrival, and the invitation to 
return soon, are genuine expressions of the affection and 
goodwill of the people in my India for all who know and 
understand them. 



II - Kunwar Singh 

KUNWAR SINGH was by caste a Thakur, and the headman of 
Chandni Chauk village. Whether, he was a good or a bad 
headman I do not know. What endeared him to me was the fact 
that he was the best and the most successful poacher in 
Kaladhungi, and a devoted admirer of my eldest brother Tom, 
my boyhood's hero. 

Kunwar Singh had many tales to tell of Tom, for he had 
accompanied him on many of his shikar expeditions, and the 
tale I like best, and that never lost anything in repetition, 
concerned an impromptus competition between brother Tom 
and a man by the name of Ellis, whom Tom had beaten by one 
point the previous year to win the B.RR.A. gold medal for the 
best rifle-shot in India. 

Tom and Ellis, unknown to each other, were shooting in the 
same jungle near Garuppu, and early one morning, when the 
mist was just rising above the tree tops, they met on the 
approach to some high ground overlooking a wide depression 
in which, at that hour of the morning, deer and pig were always 
to be found. Tom was accompanied by Kunwar Singh, while 
Ellis was accompanied by a shikari from NainiTal named 
Budhoo, whom Kunwar Singh despised because of his low caste 
and his ignorance of all matters connected with the jungles. 

After the usual greetings, Ellis said that, though Tom had 
beaten him by one miserable point on the rifle range, he would 
show Tom that he was a better game shot; and he suggested 
that they should each fire two shots to prove the point. Lots 
were drawn and Ellis, winning, decided to fire first. A careful 
approach was then made to the low ground, Ellis carrying the 
-450 Martini-Henry rifle with which he had competed at the 
B.RR.A. meeting, while Tom carried a -400 D.B. express by 
Westley-Richards of which he was justly proud, for few of these 
weapon shad up to that date arrived in India. The wind may 
have been wrong, or the approach careless. Anyway, when the 
competitors topped the high ground, no animals were in sight 



on the low ground. 

On the near side of the low ground there was a strip of dry 
grass beyond which the grass had been burnt, and it was on 
this burnt ground, now turning green with sprouting new 
shoots, that animals were to be seen both morning and 
evening. Kunwar Singh was of the opinion that some animals 
might be lurking in the strip of dry grass, and at his suggestion 
he and Budhoo set fire to it. 

When the grass was well alight and the drongos, rollers, and 
starlings were collecting from the four corners of the heavens 
to feed on the swarms of grasshoppers that were taking flight 
to escape from the flames, a movement was observed at the 
farther edge of the grass, and presently two big boar came out 
and went streaking across the burnt ground for the shelter of 
the tree jungle three hundred yards away. Very deliberately 
Ellis, who weighed fourteen stone, knelt down, raised his rifle 
and sent a bullet after the hindmost pig, kicking up the dust 
between its hind legs. Lowering his rifle, Ellis adjusted the 
back sight to two hundred yards, ejected the spent cartridge, 
and rammed a fresh one into the breach. His second bullet sent 
up a cloud of dust immediately in front of the leading pig. This 
second bullet deflected the pigs to the right, bringing them 
broadside onto the guns, and making them increase their 
speed. 

It was now Tom's turn to shoot, and to shoot in a hurry, for the 
pigs were fast approaching the tree jungle, and getting out of 
range. Standing four-square, Tom raised his rifle and, as the 
two shots rang out the pigs, both shot through the head, went 
over like rabbits. Kunwar Singh's recital of this event invariably 
ended up with: 'And then I turned to Budhoo, that city-bred son 
of a low-caste man, the smell of whose oiled hair offended me, 
and said, "Did you see that, you, who boasted that your sahib 
would teach mine how to shoot? Had my sahib wanted to 
blacken the face of yours he would not have used two bullets, 
but would have killed both pigs with one". 1 



Just how this feat could have been accomplished, Kunwar Singh 
never told me, and I never asked, for my faith in my hero was 
so great that I never for one moment doubted that, if he had 
wished, he could have killed both pigs with one bullet. Kunwar 
Singh was the first to visit me that day of days when I was 
given my first gun. He came early, and as with great pride I put 
the old double-barrelled muzzle-loader into his hands he never, 
even by the flicker of an eyelid, showed that he had seen the 
gaping split in the right barrel, or the lappings of brass wire 
that held the stock and the barrels together. Only the good 
qualities of the left barrel were commented on, and extolled; its 
length, thickness, and the years of service it would give. And 
then, laying the gun aside, he turned to me and gladdened my 
eight-year-old heart and made me doubly proud of my 
possession by saying: 'You are now no longer a boy, but a man; 
and with this good gun you can go anywhere you like in our 
jungles and never be afraid, provided you learn how to climb 
trees. 

And I will now tell you a story to show how necessary it is for 
us men who shoot in the jungles to know how to do so. 'Har 
Singh and I went out to shoot one day last April, and all would 
have been well if a fox had not crossed our path as we were 
leaving the village. Har Singh, as you know, is a poor shikari 
with little knowledge of the jungle folk, and when, after seeing 
the fox, I suggested we should turn round and go home he 
laughed at me and said it was child's talk to say that a fox 
would bring us bad luck. So we continued on our way. We had 
started when the stars were paling, and near Garuppu I fired at 
a chital stag and unaccountably missed it. Later Har Singh 
broke the wing of a pea fowl, but though we chased the 
wounded bird as hard as we could it got away in the long grass, 
where we lost it. Thereafter, though we combed the jungles we 
saw nothing to shoot, and towards the evening we turned our 
faces towards home. 

'Having fired two shots, and being afraid that the forest guards 
would be looking for us, we avoided the road and took a sandy 



nullah that ran through dense scrub and thorn-bamboo jungle. 
As we went along talking of our bad luck, suddenly a tiger 
came out into the nullah and stood looking at us. For a long 
minute the tiger stared and then it turned and went back the 
way it had come. 'After waiting a suitable time we continued on 
our way when the tiger again came out into the nullah; and 
this time, as it stood and looked at us, it was growling and 
twitching its tail. We again stood quite still, and after a time the 
tiger quietened down and left the nullah. A little later a number 
of jungle fowl rose cackling out of the dense scrub, evidently 
disturbed by the tiger, and one of them came and sat on a 
haldu tree right in front of us. As the bird alighted on a branch 
in full view of us, Har Singh said he would shoot it and so avoid 
going home empty handed. He added that the shot would 
frighten away the tiger, and before I could stop him he fired. 

'Next second there was a terrifying roar as the tiger came 
crashing through the brushwood towards us. At this spot there 
were some runi trees growing on the edge of the nullah, and I 
dashed towards one while Har Singh dashed towards another. 
My tree was the nearer to the tiger, but before it arrived I had 
climbed out of reach. Har Singh had not learnt to climb trees 
when a boy, as I had and he was still standing on the ground, 
reaching up and trying to grasp a branch, when the tiger, after 
leaving me, sprang at him. 

The tiger did not bite or scratch Har Singh, but standing on its 
hind legs it clasped the tree, pinning Har Singh against it, and 
then started to claw big bits of bark and wood off the far side of 
the tree. While it was so engaged, Har Singh was screaming 
and the tiger was roaring. I had taken my gun up into the tree 
with me, so now, holding on with my bare feet, I cocked the 
hammer and fired the gun off into the air. On hearing the shot 
so close to it the tiger bounded away, and Har Singh collapsed 
at the foot of the tree.' 


When the tiger had been gone some time, I climbed down very 
silently, and went to Har Singh. I found that one of the tiger's 



claws had entered his stomach and torn the lining from near 
his navel to within a few fingers' breadth of the backbone, and 
that all his inside had fallen out. Here was great trouble for me. 
I could not run away and leave Har Singh, and not having any 
experience in these matters, I did not know whether it would 
be best to try and put all that mass of inside back into Har 
Singh's stomach, or cut it off. I talked in whispers on this 
matter with Har Singh, for we were afraid that if the tiger 
heard us it would return and kill us, and Har Singh was of the 
opinion that his inside should be put back into his stomach. 

So, while he lay on his back on the ground, I stuffed it all back, 
including the dry leaves and grass and bits of sticks that were 
sticking to it. I then wound my pugree round him, knotting it 
tight to keep everything from falling out again, and we set out 
on the seven-mile walk to our village, myself in front, carrying 
the two guns, while Har Singh walked behind. 'We had to go 
slowly, for Har Singh was holding the pugree in position, and 
on the way night came on and Har Singh said he thought it 
would be better to go to the hospital at Kaladhungi than to our 
village; so I hid the guns, and we went the extra three miles to 
the hospital. 

The hospital was closed when we arrived, but the doctor babu 
who lives near by was awake, and when he heard our story he 
sent me to call Aladia the tobacco seller, who is also postmaster 
at Kaladhungi and who receives five rupees pay per month 
from Government, while he lit a lantern and went to the 
hospital hut with Har Singh. When I returned with Aladia, the 
doctor had laid Har Singh on a string bed and, while Aladia 
held the lantern and I held the two pieces of flesh together, the 
doctor sewed up the hole in Har Singh's stomach. Thereafter 
the doctor, who is a very kind man of raw years and who 
refused to take the two rupees I offered him, gave Har Singh a 
drink of very good medicine to make him forget the pain in his 
stomach and we went home and found our women folk crying, 
for they thought we had been killed in the jungle by dacoits, or 
by wild animals. So you see. Sahib, how necessary it is for us 



men who shoot in the jungles to know how to climb trees, for if 
Har Singh had had someone to advise him when he was a boy, 
he would not have brought all that trouble on us. 

I learnt many things from Kunwar Singh during the first few 
years that I carried the old muzzle-loader, one of them being 
the making of mental maps. The jungles we hunted in, 
sometimes together, but more often alone— for Kunwar Singh 
had a horror of dacoits and there were times when for weeks 
on end he would not leave his village— were many hundreds of 
miles square with only one road running through them. Times 
without number when returning from a shoot I called in at 
Kunwar Singh's village, which was three miles nearer the 
forest than my house was, to tell him I had shot a chital or 
sambhar stag, or maybe a big pig, and to ask him to retrieve 
the bag. 

He never once failed to do so, no matter in how great a 
wilderness of tree or scrub or grass jungle I had carefully 
hidden the animal I had shot, to protect it from vultures. We 
had a name for every outstanding tree, and for every water 
hole, game track, and nullah. All our distances were measured 
by imaginary flight of a bullet fired from a muzzle-loader, and 
all our directions fixed by' The runi tree against which the 
tigress— who evidently had just given birth to cubs in that 
area, and who resented the presence of human beings— pinned 
Har Singh, was about eighteen inches thick, and in her rage 
the tigress tore away a third of it. 

This tree became a landmark for all who shot or poached in the 
Garuppu jungles until, some twenty-five years later; it was 
destroyed by a forest fire. Har Singh, in spite of the rough and 
ready treatment he received at the hands of his three friends, 
and in spite of the vegetation that went inside him, suffered no 
ill effects from his wound, and lived to die of old age. The four 
points of the compass. When I had hidden an animal, or 
Kunwar Singh had seen vultures collected on a tree and 
suspected that a leopard or a tiger had made a kill, either he or 



I would set out with absolute, confidence that we would find 
the spot indicated, no matter what time of day or night it might 
be. 

After I left school and started work in Bengal I was only able to 
visit Kaladhungi for about three weeks each year, and I was 
greatly distressed to find on one of these annual visits that my 
old friend Kunwar Singh had fallen a victim to the curse of our 
foothills, opium. With a constitution weakened by malaria the 
pernicious habit grew on him, and though he made me many 
promises he had not the moral strength to keep them. I was 
therefore not surprised, on my visit to Kaladhungi one 
February; to be told by the men in our village that Kunwar 
Singh was very seriously ill. News of my arrival spread through 
Kaladhungi that night, and next day Kunwar Singh's youngest 
son, a lad of eighteen, came hot-foot to tell me that his father 
was at death's door, and that he wished to see me before he 
died. 

As headman of Chandni Chauk, paying Government land 
revenue of four thousand rupees, Kunwar Singh was an 
important person, and lived in a big stone-built house with a 
slate roof in which I had often enjoyed his hospitality. Now as I 
approached the village in company with his son, I heard the 
wailing of women coming, not from the house, but from a small 
one-roomed hut Kunwar Singh had built for one of his servants. 
As the son led me towards the hut, he said his father had been 
moved to it because the grandchildren disturbed his sleep. 
Seeing us coming, Kunwar Singh's eldest son stepped out of 
the hut and informed me that his father was unconscious, and 
that he only had a few minutes to live. I stopped at the door of 
the hut, and when my eyes had got accustomed to the dim 
light, made dimmer by a thick pall of smoke which filled the 
room, I saw Kunwar Singh lying on the bare mud floor, naked, 
and partly covered with a sheet. His nerveless right arm was 
supported by an old man sitting on the floor near him, and his 
fingers were being held round the tail of a cow. (This custom of 
a dying man being made to hold the tail of a cow— preferably 



that of a black heifer— has its origin in the Hindu belief that 
when the spirit leaves its earthly body it is confronted with a 
river of blood, on the far side of which sits the Judge before 
whom the spirit must appear to answer for its sins. The heifer's 
tail is the only way by which the departing spirit can cross the 
river, and if the spirit is not provided with means of transit it is 
condemned to remain on earth, to be a torment to those who 
failed to enable it to appear before the judgment seat.) 

Near Kunwar Singh's head was a brazier with cow-dung cakes 
burning on it, and by the brazier a priest was sitting, intoning 
prayers and ringing a bell. Every available inch of floor space 
was packed with men, and with women who were wailing and 
repeating over and over again, 'He has gone! He has gone!' I 
knew men died like this in India every day, but I was not going 
to let my friend be one of them. In fact, if I could help it he 
would not die at all, and anyway not at present. Striding into 
the room, I picked up the iron brazier, which was hotter than I 
expected it to be, and burnt my hands. This I carried to the 
door and flung outside. Returning, I cut the bark rope by which 
the cow was tethered to a peg driven into the mud floor, and 
led it outside. 

As these acts, which I had performed in silence, became 
evident to the people assembled in the room, the hubbub began 
to die down, and it ceased altogether when I took the priest's 
arm and conducted him from the room. Then, standing at the 
door, I ordered everyone to go outside; the order was obeyed 
without a murmur or a single protest. The number of people, 
both old and young, who emerged from the hut, was incredible. 
When the last of them had crossed the doorstep, I told Kunwar 
Singh's eldest son to warm two seers of fresh milk and to bring 
it to me with as little delay as possible. The man looked at me 
in blank surprise, but when I repeated the order he hurried off 
to execute it. I now re-entered the hut, pulled forward a string 
bed which had been pushed against the wall, picked Kunwar 
Singh up and laid him on it. 



Fresh air, and plenty of it, was urgently needed, and as I looked 
round I saw a small window which had been boarded up. It did 
not take long to tear down the boards and let a stream of clean 
sweet air blow directly from the jungles into the overheated 
room which reeked with the smell of human beings, cow dung, 
burnt ghee, and acrid smoke. When I picked up Kunwar Singh's 
wasted frame, I knew there was a little life in it, but only a very 
little. His eyes, which were sunk deep into his head, were 
closed, his lips were blue, and his breath was coming in short 
gasps. 

Soon, however, the fresh, clean air began to revive him and his 
breathing became less laboured and more regular, and 
presently, as I sat on his bed and watched through the door the 
commotion that was taking place among the mourners whom I 
had ejected from the death-chamber, I became aware that he 
had opened his eyes and was looking at me; and without 
turning my head, I began to speak. 'Times have changed, uncle, 
and you with them. There was a day when no man would have 
dared to remove you from your own house, and lay you on the 
ground in a servant's hut to die like an outcaste and a beggar. 
You would not listen to my words of warning and now the 
accursed drug has brought you to this. Had I delayed but a few 
minutes in answering your summons this day, you know you 
would by now have been on your way to the burning-ghat. As 
headman of Chandni Chauk and the best shikari in Kaladhungi, 
all men respected you. But now you have lost that respect, and 
you who were strong, and who ate of the best, are weak and 
empty of stomach, for as we came your son told me nothing has 
passed your lips for sixteen days. But you are not going to die, 
old friend, as they told you were. You will live for many more 
years, and though we may never shoot together again in the 
Garuppu jungles, you will not want for game, for I will share all 
I shoot with you, as I have always done. 'And now, here in this 
hut, with the sacred thread round your fingers and a pipal leaf 
in your hands, you must swear an oath on your eldest son's 
head that never again will you touch the foul drug. And this 



time you will and you shall keep your oath. And now, while we 
wait for the milk your son is bringing, we will smoke . 1 

Kunwar Singh had not taken his eyes off me while I was 
speaking and now for the first time he opened his lips and said, 
'How can a man who is dying smoke ? 1 'On the subject of dying', 
I said, 'we will say no more, for as I have just told you, you are 
not going to die. And as to how we will smoke, I will show you.' 
Then, taking two cigarettes from my case, I lit one and placed 
it between his lips. Slowly he took a pull at it, coughed, and 
with a very feeble hand removed the cigarette. But when the fit 
of coughing was over, he replaced it between his lips and 
continued to draw on it. Before we had finished our smoke, 
Kunwar Singh's son returned carrying a big brass vessel, which 
he would have dropped at the door if I had not hurriedly 
relieved him of it. His surprise was understandable, for the 
father whom he had last seen lying on the ground dying, was 
now lying on the bed, his head resting on my hat, smoking. 
There was nothing in the hut to drink from, so I sent the son 
back to the house for a cup; and when he had brought it I gave 
Kunwar Singh a drink of warm milk. 

I stayed in the hut till late into the night, and when I left 
Kunwar Singh had drunk a seer of milk and was sleeping 
peacefully on a warm and comfortable bed. Before I left I 
warned the son that he was on no account to allow anyone to 
come near the hut; that he was to sit by his father and give him 
a drink of milk every time he awoke; and that if on my return in 
the morning I found Kunwar Singh dead, I would burn down 
the village. The sun was just rising next morning when I 
returned to Chandni Chauk to find both Kunwar Singh and his 
son fast asleep and the brass vessel empty. Kunwar Singh kept 
his oath, and though he never regained sufficient strength to 
accompany me on my shikar expeditions, he visited me often 
and died peacefully four years later in his own house and on his 
own bed. 



Ill - Mothi 

MOTHI had the delicate, finely chiselled features that are the 
heritage of all high-caste people in India, but he was only a 
young stripling, all arms and legs, when his father and mother 
died and left him with the responsibilities of the family 
Fortunately it was a small one, consisting only of his younger 
brother and sister. Mothi was at that time fourteen years of 
age, and had been married for six years. One of his first acts on 
finding himself unexpectedly the head of the family was to 
fetch his twelve-year-old wife— whom he had not seen since 
the day of their wedding— from her father's house in the Kota 
Dun, some dozen miles from Kaladhungi. As the cultivation of 
the six acres of land Mothi inherited entailed more work than 
the four young people could tackle, Mothi took on a partner, 
locally known as Agee, who in return for his day-and-night 
services received free board and lodging and half of the crops 
produced. The building of the communal hut with bamboos and 
grass procured from the jungles, under permit, and carried 
long distances on shoulder and on head, and the constant 
repairs to the hut necessitated by the violent storms that sweep 
the foothills, threw a heavy burden on Mothi and his helpers, 
and to relieve them of this burden I built them a masonry 
house, with three rooms and a wide veranda, on a four-foot 
plinth. For, with the exception of Mothi's wife who had come 
from a higher altitude, all of them were steeped in malaria. 

To protect their crops the tenants used to erect a thorn fence 
round the entire village, but though it entailed weeks of hard 
labour, this flimsy fence afforded little protection against stray 
cattle and wild animals, and when the crops were on the 
ground the tenants, or members of their families, had to keep 
watch in the fields all night. Firearms were strictly rationed, 
and for our forty tenants the Government allowed us one 
single-barrelled muzzle-loading gun. This gun enables one 
tenant in turn to protect his crops with a lethal weapon, while 
the others had to rely on tin cans which they beat throughout 
the night. Though the gun accounted for a certain number of 



pigs and porcupines, which were the worst offenders, the 
nightly damage was considerable, for the village was isolated 
and surrounded by forests. So, when my handling contract at 
Mokameh Ghat began paying a dividend, I started building a 
masonry wall round the village. When completed the wall was 
six feet high and three miles long. It took ten years to build, for 
my share of the dividends was small. If today you motor from 
Haldwani to Ramnagar, through Kaladhungi, you will skirt the 
upper end of the wall before you cross the Boar Bridge and 
enter the forest. 

I was walking through the village one cold December morning, 
with Robin, my dog, running ahead and putting up covey after 
covey of grey partridge which no one but Robin ever disturbed 
— for all who lived in the village loved to hear them calling at 
sunrise and at sunset— when in the soft ground at the edge of 
one of the irrigation channels I saw the tracks of a pig. This 
pig, with great, curved, wicked-looking tusks, was as big as a 
buffalo calf and was known to everyone in the village. As a 
squeaker he had wormed his way through the thorn fence and 
fattened on the crops the wall had worried him at first, but it 
had a rough face and, being a determined pig, he had in time 
learnt to climb it. Time and time again the watchers in the 
fields had fired at him and on several occasions he had left a 
blood trail, but none of his wounds had proved fatal and the 
only effect they had had on him was to make him more wary. 

On this December morning the pig's tracks led me towards 
Mothi's holding, and as I approached the house I saw Mothi's 
wife standing in front of it, her hands on her hips, surveying 
the ruin of their potato patch. The pig had done a very 
thorough job, for the tubers were not mature and he had been 
hungry, and while Robin cast round to see in which direction 
the marauder had gone the woman gave vent to her feelings. 'It 
is all Punwa's father's fault', she said. 'It was his turn for the 
gun last night, and instead of staying at home and looking after 
his own property he must need go and sit up in Kalu's wheat 
field because he thought there was a chance of shooting a 



sambhar there. And while he was away; this is what the shaitan 
has done . 1 No woman in our part of India ever refers to her 
husband, or addresses him, by name. Before children are born 
he is referred to as the man of the house, and after children 
come is spoken of and addressed as the father of the firstborn. 
Mothi now had three children, of whom the eldest was Punwa, 
so to his wife he was 'Punwa's father', and his wife to everyone 
in the village was 'Punwa's mother'. 

Punwa's mother was not only the hardest-working woman in 
our village but she also had the sharpest tongue, and after 
telling me in no uncertain terms what she thought of Punwa's 
father for having absented himself the previous night, she 
turned on me and said I had wasted my money in building a 
wall over which a pig could climb to eat her potatoes, and that 
if I could not shoot the pig myself it was my duty to raise the 
wall a few feet so that no pig could climb over it. Mothi 
fortunately arrived while the storm was still breaking over my 
head, so whistling to Robin I beat a hasty retreat and left him 
to weather it. 

That evening I picked up the tracks of the pig on the far side of 
the wall and followed them for two miles, at times along game 
paths and at times along the bank of the Boar River, until they 
led me to a dense patch of thorn bushes interlaced with 
lantana. At the edge of this cover I took up position, as there 
was a fifty- fifty chance of the pig leaving the cover while there 
was still sufficient light for me to shoot by. Shortly after I had 
taken up position behind a rock on the bank of the river, a 
sambhar hind started belling at the upper end of the jungle in 
which a few years later I was to shoot the Bachelor of 
Powalgarh. The hind was warning the jungle folk of the 
presence of a tiger. A fortnight previously a party of three guns, 
with eight elephants, had arrived in Kaladhungi with the 
express purpose of shooting a tiger which, at that time, had his 
headquarters in the forest block for which I had a shooting 
pass. 



The Boar River formed the boundary between my block and the 
block taken by the party of three guns, and they had enticed 
the tiger to kill in their block by tying up fourteen young 
buffaloes on their side of the river. Two of these buffaloes had 
been killed by the tiger, the other twelve had died of neglect, 
and at about nine o'clock the previous night I had heard the 
report of a heavy rifle. I sat behind the rock for two hours, 
listening to the belling sambhar but without seeing anything of 
the pig, and when there was no longer any light to shoot by I 
crossed the river and, gaining the Kota road, loped down it, 
easing up and moving cautiously when passing the caves in 
which a big python lived, and where Bill Bailey of the Forest 
Department a month previously had shot a twelve-foot 
hamadryad. At the village gate I stopped and shouted to Mothi 
to be ready to accompany me at crack of dawn next morning. 

Mothi had been my constant companion in the Kaladhungi 
jungles for many years. He was keen and intelligent, gifted 
with good eyesight and hearing, could move through the 
jungles silently, and was as brave as man could be. He was 
never late for an appointment, and as we walked through the 
dew- drenched jungle that morning, listening to the multitude 
of sounds of the awakening jungle folk, I told him of the belling 
of the sambhar hind and of my suspicion that she had 
witnessed the killing of her young one by the tiger, and that she 
had stayed to watch the tiger on his kill— a not uncommon 
occurrence— for in no other way could I account for her 
sustained belling. 

Mothi was delighted at the prospect of our finding a fresh kill, 
for his means only permitted of his buying meat for his family 
once a month, and a sambhar, chital, or pig, freshly killed by a 
tiger or by a leopard, was a godsend to him. I had located the 
belling sambhar as being due north and some fifteen hundred 
yards from me the previous evening, and when we arrived at 
this spot and found no kill we started looking on the ground for 
blood, hair, or a drag mark that would lead us to the kill; for I 
was still convinced that there was a kill to be found and that 



the killer was a tiger. 

At this spot two shallow depressions, coming down from the 
foot of the hill a few hundred yards away met. The depressions 
ran more or less parallel to each other at a distance of about 
thirty yards and Mothi suggested that he should go up the 
right-hand depression while I went up the other. As there were 
only low bushes between, and we should be close to, and within 
sight of, each other, I agreed to the suggestion. 

We had proceeded a hundred yards examining every foot of the 
ground, and going dead slow, when Mothi, just as I turned my 
head to look at him started backwards, screaming as he did so. 
Then he whipped round and ran for dear life, beating the air 
with his hands as if warding off a swarm of bees and continuing 
to scream as he ran. The sudden and piercing scream of a 
human being in a jungle where a moment before all has been 
silent is terrifying to hear, and guite impossible to describe. 
Instinctively I knew what had happened. With his eyes fixed on 
the ground, looking for blood or hair, Mothi had failed to see 
where he was going, and had walked on to the tiger. Whether 
he had been badly mauled or not I could not see, for only his 
head and shoulders were visible above the bushes. I kept the 
sights of my rifle a foot behind him as he ran, intending to 
press the trigger if I saw any movement, but to my intense 
relief there was no movement as I swung round, and after he 
had covered a hundred yards I considered he was safe. I yelled 
to him to stop, adding that I was coming to him, then, backing 
away for a few yards, for I did not know whether the tiger had 
changed his position I hurried down the depression towards 
Mothi. He was standing with his back against a tree and I was 
greatly relieved to see that there was no blood on him or on the 
ground on which he was standing. As I reached him he asked 
what had happened, and when I told him that nothing had 
happened he expressed great surprise. He asked if the tiger 
had not sprung at him, or followed him; and when I replied that 
he had done everything possible to make the tiger do so, he 
said, 'I know. Sahib. I know I should not have screamed and 



run, but I— could— not— help— 1 as his voice tailed away and 
his head came forward I caught him by the throat, but he 
slipped through my hands and slumped to the ground. Every 
drop of blood had drained from his face, and as he lay minute 
after long minute without any movement, I feared the shock 
had killed him. 

There is little one can do in the jungles in an emergency of this 
kind, and that little I did. I stretched Mothi on his back, 
loosened his clothes, and massaged the region of his heart. Just 
as I was giving up hope and preparing to carry him home, he 
opened his eyes. 

When Mothi was comfortably seated on the ground with his 
back to the tree and a half-smoked cigarette between his lips I 
asked him to tell me exactly what had happened. 

'I had gone a short distance up the depression after I left you', 
he said, 'closely examining the ground for traces of blood or 
hair, when I saw what looked like a spot of dry blood on a leaf. 
So I stooped down to have a closer look and, as I raised my 
head, I looked straight into the face of the tiger. The tiger was 
lying crouched down facing me at a distance of three or four 
paces. His head was a little raised off the ground; his mouth 
was wide open, and there was blood on his chin and on his 
chest. He looked as though he was on the point of springing at 
me, so I lost my head and screamed and ran away. 

He had seen nothing of the sambhar kill. He said the ground 
was open and free of bushes and there was no kill where the 
tiger was lying. 

Telling Mothi to stay where he was I stubbed out my cigarette 
and set off to investigate, for I could think of no reason why a 
tiger with its mouth open, and blood on its chin and on its 
chest, should allow Mothi to approach within a few feet, over 
open ground, and not kill him when he screamed in its face. 
Going with the utmost caution to the spot where Mothi was 
standing when he screamed, I saw in front of me a bare patch 



of ground from which the tiger had swept the carpet of dead 
leaves as he had rolled from side to side; at the nearer edge of 
this bare patch of ground there was a semicircle of clotted 
blood. Skirting round where the tiger had been lying, to avoid 
disturbing the ground, I picked up on the far side of it a light 
and fresh blood trail, which for no apparent reason zigzagged 
towards the hill, and then continued along the foot of the hill 
for a few hundred yards and entered a deep and narrow ravine 
in which there was a little stream. Up this ravine, which ran 
deep into the foothills, the tiger had gone. I made my way back 
to the bare patch of ground and examined the clotted blood. 
There were splinters of bone and teeth in it, and these splinters 
provided me with the explanation I was looking for. The rifle¬ 
shot I had heard two nights previously had shattered the tiger's 
lower jaw, and he had made for the jungle in which he had his 
home. He had gone as far as his sufferings and loss of blood 
permitted and had then lain down on the spot where first the 
sambhar had seen him tossing about, and where thirty hours 
later Mothi walked on to him. 

The most painful wound that can be inflicted on an animal, the 
shattering of the lower jaw, had guite evidently induced high 
fever and the poor beast had perhaps only been semiconscious 
when he heard Mothi screaming in his face. He had got up 
quietly and staggered away, in a last effort to reach the ravine 
in which he knew there was water. 

To make quite sure that my deductions were correct Mothi and 
I crossed the river into the adjoining shooting block to have a 
look at the ground where the fourteen buffaloes had been tied 
up. Here, high up in a tree, we found the machan the three 
guns had sat on, and the kill the tiger had been eating when 
fired at. From the kill a heavy blood trail led down to the river, 
with elephant tracks on each side of it. Leaving Mothi on the 
right bank I recrossed the river into my block, picked up the 
blood trail and the elephant tracks, and followed them for five 
or six hundred yards to where the blood trail led into heavy 
cover. At the edge of the cover the elephants had halted and. 



after standing about for some time, had turned to the right and 
gone away in the direction of Kaladhungi. I had met the 
returning elephants as I was starting out the previous evening 
to try and get a shot at the old pig, and one of the guns had 
asked me where I was going, and when I told him, had 
appeared to want to tell me something but was restrained from 
doing so by his companions. So, while the party of three guns 
went off on their elephants to the Forest Bungalow where they 
were staying, I had gone off on foot, without any warning, into 
the jungle in which they had left a wounded tiger. 

The walk back to the village from where I had left Mothi was 
only about three miles, but it took us about as many hours to 
cover the distance, for Mothi was unaccountably weak and had 
to rest frequently. After leaving him at his house I went straight 
to the Forest Bungalow, where I found the party of three 
packed up and on the point of leaving to catch the evening 
train at Haldwani. We talked on the steps of the veranda for 
some little time, I doing most of the talking, and when I learnt 
that the only reason they could not spare the time to recover 
the tiger they had wounded was the keeping of a social 
engagement, I told them that if Mothi died as a result of shock 
or if the tiger killed any of my tenants, they would have to face 
a charge of manslaughter. The party left after my talk with 
them, and next morning, armed with a heavy rifle, I entered the 
ravine up which the tiger had gone, not with the object of 
recovering a trophy for others, but with the object of putting 
the tiger out of his misery and burning his skin. The ravine, 
every foot of which I knew, was the last place I would have 
selected in which to look for a wounded tiger. However, I 
searched it from top to bottom, and also the hills on either side, 
for the whole of that day without finding any trace of the tiger, 
for the blood trail had stopped shortly after he entered the 
ravine. 

Ten days later a forest guard on his rounds came on the 
remains of a tiger that had been eaten by vultures. In the 
summer of that year Government made a rule prohibiting 



sitting up for tigers between the hours of sunset and sunrise, 
and making it incumbent on sportsmen wounding tigers to 
make every effort to bring the wounded animal to bag, and to 
make an immediate report of the occurrence to the nearest 
Forest Officer and police outpost. Mothi met with his 
experience in December, and when we left Kaladhungi in April 
he appeared to be little the worse for the shock. But his luck 
was out, for a month later be was badly mauled by a leopard he 
wounded one night in his field and followed next morning into 
heavy covers and he had hardly recovered from his wounds 
when he had the misfortune of being responsible for the death 
of a cow— the greatest crime a Hindu can commit. The cow, an 
old and decrepit animal that had strayed in from an adjoining 
village, was grazing in Mothi's field, and as he attempted to 
drive it out it put its hoof in a deep rat-hole and broke its leg. 
For weeks Mothi attended assiduously to the cow as it lay in his 
field, but it died eventually, and the matter being too serious 
for the village priest to deal with, he ordered Mothi to make a 
pilgrimage to Hardwar. So, having borrowed money for the 
journey, to Hardwar Mothi went. Here to the head priest at the 
main temple Mothi confessed his crime, and after that 
dignitary had given the offence due consideration he ordered 
Mothi to make a donation to the temple: this would absolve him 
of his crime, but in order to show repentance he would have 
also to do penance. The priest then asked him from what acts 
he derived most pleasure and Mothi, being without guile, made 
answer that he derived most pleasure from shooting, and from 
eating meat. Mothi was then told by the priest that in future he 
must refrain from these two pleasures. 

Mothi returned from his pilgrimage cleared of his crime, but 
burdened with a lifelong penance. His opportunities-for 
shooting had been few, for besides having to share the muzzle¬ 
loading gun with others he had had to confine his shooting to 
the village boundaries, as no man in his position was permitted 
to shoot in Government forests; even so, Mothi had derived 
great pleasure from the old gun, and from the occasional shots 



I had permitted him— against all rules— to fire from my rifle. 
Hard as this half of his penance was the second half was even 
harder, and, moreover, it adversely affected his health. Though 
his means had only allowed him to buy a small meat ration 
once a month, pigs and porcupines were plentiful, and deer 
occasionally strayed into the fields at night. It was the custom 
in our village, a custom to which I also adhered, for an animal 
shot by one to be shared by all, so Mothi had not had to depend 
entirely on the meat he could buy. 

It was during the winter following his pilgrimage to Hardwar 
that Mothi developed a hacking cough. As the remedies we 
tried failed to give relief, I got a doctor friend who was passing 
through Kaladhungi to examine him, and was horrified to learn 
that he was suffering from tuberculosis. On the doctor's 
recommendation I sent Mothi to the Bhowali Sanatorium, thirty 
miles away. Five days later he returned with a letter from the 
Superintendent of the Sanatorium saying that the case was 
hopeless, and that for this reason the Superintendent regretted 
he could not admit Mothi. A medical missionary who was 
staying with us at the time, and who had worked for years in a 
sanatorium, advised us to make Mothi sleep in the open and 
drink a quart of milk with a few drops of paraffin in it each 
morning. So for the rest of that winter Mothi slept in the open, 
and while sitting on our veranda, smoking a cigarette and 
talking to me, each morning drank a quart of milk fresh from 
our cows. 

The poor of India are fatalists, and in addition have little 
stamina to fight disease. Deprived of our company, though not 
of our help, Mothi lost hope when we left for our summer 
home, and died a month later. The women of our foothills are 
the hardest workers in India, and the hardest working of them 
all was Mothi's widow, Punwa's mother. A small compact 
woman, as hard as flint and a beaver for work— young enough 
to remarry but precluded from doing so by reasons of her caste 
— she-bravely and resolutely faced the future, and right 
gallantly she fulfilled her task, ably assisted by her young 



children. Of her three children, Punwa, the eldest, was now 
twelve, and with the assistance of neighbors was able to do the 
ploughing and other field jobs. 

Kunthi, a girl, was ten and married, and until she left the 
village five years later to join her husband she assisted her 
mother in all her thousand and one tasks, which included 
cooking the food and washing up the dishes; washing and 
mending the clothes— for Punwa's mother was very particular 
about her own and her children's dress, and no matter how old 
and patched the garments were, they always had to be clean;, 
fetching water from the irrigation furrow or from the Boar river 
for domestic purposes; bringing firewood from the jungles, and 
grass and tender young leaves for the milch, cows and their 
calves; weeding and cutting the crops; husking the paddy, in a 
hole cut in a slab of rock, with an iron shod staff that was heavy 
enough to tire the muscles of any man; winnowing the wheat 
for Punwa to take to the watermill to be ground into atta; and 
making frequent visits to the bazaar two miles away to drive 
hard bargains for the few articles of food and clothing the 
family could afford to buy Sher Singh, the youngest child, was 
eight, and from the moment he opened his eyes at crack of 
dawn each morning until he closed them when the evening 
meal had been eaten he did everything that a boy could do. He 
even gave Punwa a hand with the ploughing, though he had to 
be helped at the end of each furrow as he was not strong 
enough to turn the plough. 

Sher Singh, without a care in the world, was the happiest child 
in the village. When he could not be seen he could always be 
heard, for he loved to sing. The cattle four bullocks, twelve 
cows, eight calves, and Lalu the bull — were his special charge, 
and each morning after milking the cows he released the herd 
from the stakes to which he had tethered them the evening 
before, drove them out of the shed and through a wicket in the 
boundary wall, and then set to clean up the shed. It would now 
be time for the morning meal, and when he heard the call from 
his brother, or Kunthi, he would hurry home across the fields 



taking the milk can with him. The frugal morning meal 
consisted of fresh hot chapatis and dal, liberally seasoned with 
green chillies and salt and cooked in mustard oil. Having 
breakfasted, and finished any chores about the house that he 
was called upon to do, Sher Singh would begin his day's real 
work. This was to graze the cattle in the jungle, prevent them 
from straying, and guard them against leopards and tigers. 
Having collected the four bullocks and twelve cows from the 
open ground beyond the boundary wall, where they would be 
lying basking in the sun, and left Kunthi to keep an eye on the 
calves, this small tousle-headed boy, his axe over his shoulder 
and Lalu the bull following him, would drive his charges over 
the Boar Bridge and into the dense jungle beyond, calling to 
each by name. 

Lalu was a young scrub bull destined to be a plough-bullock 
when he had run his course but who, at the time I am writing 
about, was free of foot and the pride of Sher Singh his foster- 
brother, for Lalu had shared his mother's milk with Sher Singh. 
Sher Singh had christened his foster-brother Lalu, which 
means red. But Lalu was not red. He was of a light dun colour, 
with stronger markings on the shoulders and a dark, almost 
black line running down the length of his back. His horns were 
short, sharp, and strong, with the light and dark colourings 
associated with the shoehorns that adorned dressing tables of 
that period. 

When human beings and animals live in close association with 
each other under conditions in which they are daily subjected 
to common dangers, each infuses the other with a measure of 
courage and confidence which the one possesses and the other 
lacks. Sher Singh, whose father and grandfather had been 
more at home in the jungles than in the walks of men, had no 
fear of anything that walked, and Lalu, young and vigorous, 
had unbounded confidence in himself. So while Sher Singh 
infused Lalu with courage, Lalu in turn infused Sher Singh with 
confidence. In consequence Sher Singh's cattle grazed where 
others feared to go, and he was justly proud of the fact that 



they were in better condition than any others in the village, and 
that no-leopard or tiger had ever taken toll of them. 

Four miles from our village there is a valley about five miles in 
length, running north and south, which has no equal in beauty 
or richness of wild life in the five thousand square miles of 
forest land in the United Provinces. At the upper end of the 
valley a clear stream, which grows in volume as it progresses, 
gushes from a cave in which a python lives, from under the 
roots of an old jamun tree. This crystal-clear stream with its 
pools and runs is alive with many kinds of small fish on which 
live no fewer than five varieties of kingfishers. 

In the valley grow flowering and fruit-bearing trees and bushes 
that attract a multitude of nectar-drinking and fruit-eating 
birds and animals, which in turn attract predatory birds and 
carnivorous animals which find ample cover in the dense 
undergrowth and matted cane-brakes. In places the set of the 
stream has caused miniature landslides, and on these grows a 
reedy kind of grass, with broad lush leaves, much fancied by 
sambhar and kakar. 

The valley was a favourite haunt of mine. One winter -evening, 
shortly after our descent to Kaladhungi from our summer 
home, I was standing at a point where there is a clear view into 
the valley when, in a clump of grass to the left, I saw a 
movement. After a long scrutiny the movement revealed itself 
as an animal feeding on the lush grass on a steep slope. The 
animal was too light for a sambhar and too big for a kakar, so I 
set out to stalk it, and as I did so a tiger started calling in the 
valley a few hundred yards lower down. My quarry also heard 
the tiger, and as it raised its head I saw to my surprise that it 
was Lalu. With head poised he stood perfectly still listening to 
the tiger, and when it stopped calling, he unconcernedly 
resumed cropping the grass. This was forbidden ground for 
Lalu, for cattle are not permitted to graze in Government 
Reserved Forests, and moreover Lalu was in danger from the 
tiger; so I called to him by name and, after a little hesitation, he 



came up the steep bank and we returned to the village 
together. Sher Singh was tying up his cattle in the shed when 
we arrived, and when I told him where I had found Lalu he 
laughed and said, 'Don't fear for this one. Sahib. The forest 
guard is a friend of mine and would not impound my Lalu, and 
as for the tiger, Lalu is well able to take care of himself.' 

Not long after this incident, the Chief Conservator of Forests, 
Smythies, and his wife arrived on tour in Kaladhungi, and as 
the camels carrying their camp equipment were coming down 
the forest road towards the Boar Bridge, a tiger killed a cow on 
the road in front of them. On the approach of the camels, and 
the shouting of the men with them, the tiger left the cow on the 
road and bounded into the jungle. The Smythies were sitting on 
our veranda having morning coffee when the camel men 
brought word of the killing of the cow. Mrs. Smythies was keen 
to shoot the tiger, so I went off with two of her men to put up a 
machan for her, and found that in the meantime the tiger had 
returned and dragged the cow twenty yards into the jungle. 
When the machan was ready I sent back for Mrs. Smythies and, 
after putting her into the machan with a forest guard to keep 
her company, I climbed a tree on the edge of the road hoping to 
get a photograph of the tiger. 

It was 4 p.m. We had been in position half an hour and a kakar 
had just started barking in the direction in which we knew the 
tiger was lying up, when down the road came Lalu. On 
reaching the spot where the cow had been killed he very 
carefully smelt the ground and a big pool of blood, then turned 
to the edge of the road and with head held high and nose 
stretched out started to follow the drag. When he saw the cow 
he circled round her, tearing up the ground with his hoofs and 
snorting with rage. After tying my camera to a branch I slipped 
off the tree and conducted a very angry and protesting Lalu to 
the edge of the village. Hardly had I returned to my perch on 
the tree, however, when up the road came Lalu to make a 
second demonstration round the dead cow. Mrs. Smythies now 
sent the forest guard to drive Lalu away, and as the man passed 



me I told him to take the bull across the Boar Bridge and to 
remain there with the elephant that was coming later for Mrs. 
Smythies. The kakar had stopped barking some time previously 
and a covey of jungle fowl now started cackling a few yards 
behind the machan. Getting my camera ready I looked towards 
Mrs. Smythies, and saw she had her rifle poised, and at that 
moment Lalu appeared for the third time. (We learnt later that, 
after being taken across the bridge, he had circled round, 
crossed the river bed lower down and disappeared into the 
jungle.) This time Lalu trotted up to the cow and, either seeing 
or smelling the tiger, lowered his head and charged into the 
bushes, bellowing loudly. Three times he did this, and after 
each charge he retreated backwards to his starting-point, 
slashing upwards with his horns as he did so. I have seen 
buffaloes driving tigers away from their kills, and I have seen 
cattle doing the same with leopards but, with the exception of a 
Himalayan bear, I had never before seen a solitary animal— 
and a scrub bull at that— drive a tiger away from his kill. 

Courageous as Lalu was he was no match for the tiger, who 
was now losing his temper and answering Lalu's bellows with 
angry growls. Remembering a small boy back in the village 
whose heart would break if anything happened to his beloved 
companion, I was on the point of going to Lalu's help when 
Mrs. Smythies very sportingly gave up her chance of shooting 
the tiger, so I shouted to the mahout to bring up the elephant. 
Lalu was very subdued as he followed me to the shed where 
Sher Singh was waiting to tie him up, and I think he was as 
relieved as I was that the tiger had not accepted his challenge 
while he was defending the dead cow. The tiger fed on the cow 
that night and next evening, and while Mrs. Smythies was 
having another Unsuccessful try to get a shot at him, I took a 
cine picture which some who read this story may remember 
having seen. In the picture the tiger is seen coming down a 
steep bank, and drinking at a little pool. 

The jungle was Sher Singh's playground, the only playground 
he ever knew, just as it had been my playground as a boy, and 



of all whom I have known he alone enjoyed the jungles as much 
as I have done. Intelligent and observant, his knowledge of 
jungle lore was incredible. Nothing escaped his attention, and 
he was as fearless as the animal whose name he bore. 

Our favourite evening walk was along one of the three roads 
which met on the far side of the Boar Bridge— the abandoned 
trunk road to Moradabad, the road to Kota, and the forest road 
to Ramnagar. Most evenings at sundown we would hear Sher 
Singh before we saw him, for he sang with abandon in a clear 
treble voice that carried far as he drove his cattle home. 

Always he would greet us with a smile and a salaam, and 
always he would have something interesting to tell us. 

'The big tiger's tracks were on the road this morning coming 
from the direction of Kota and going towards Naya Gaon, and 
at midday I heard him calling at the lower end of the Dhunigad 
cane-brake.' 'Near Saryapani I heard the clattering of horns, so 
I climbed a tree and saw two chital stags righting. One of them 
has very big horns. Sahib, and is very fat, and I have eaten no 
meat for many days. 1 

'What am I carrying?'— He had something wrapped in big 
green leaves and tied round with bark balanced on his tousled 
head. 'I am carrying a pig's leg. I saw some vultures on a tree, 
so I went to have a look and under a bush I found a pig killed 
by a leopard last night and partly eaten. If you want to shoot 
the leopard. Sahib, I will take you to the kill. 1 'Today I found a 
beehive in a hollow haldu tree', he said one day, proudly 
exhibiting a large platter of leaves held together with long 
thorns on which the snow-white comb was resting. 'I have 
brought the honey for you. 1 Then, glancing at the rifle in my 
hands, he added, 'I will bring the honey to the house when I 
have finished my work for perchance you may meet a pig or a 
kakar and with the honey in your hands you would not be able 
to shoot.' The cutting of the hive out of the haldu tree with his 
small axe had probably taken him two hours or more, and he 
had got badly stung in the process, for his hands were swollen 



and one eye was nearly closed, but he said nothing about this 
and to have commented on it would have embarrassed him. 

Later that night, while we were having dinner, he slipped 
silently into the room and as he laid the brass tray, polished till 
it looked like gold, on our table, he touched the elbow of his 
right arm with the fingers of his left hand, an old hill custom 
denoting respect, which is fast dying out. After depositing such 
a gift on the table, leaving the tray for Kunthi to call for in the 
morning, Sher Singh would pause at the door and, looking 
down and scratching the carpet with his toes, would say, 'If you 
are going bird shooting tomorrow I will send Kunthi out with 
the cattle and come with you, for I know where there are a lot 
of birds'. He was always shy in a house, and on these occasions 
spoke with a catch in his voice as though he had too many 
words in his mouth and was trying, with difficulty, to swallow 
the ones that were getting in his way. 

Sher Singh was in his element on these bird shoots, which the 
boys of the village enjoyed as much as he and I did, for in 
addition to the excitement and the prospect of having a bird to 
take home at the end of the day, there was always a halt at 
midday at a prearranged spot to which the man sent out earlier 
would bring the fresh sweets and parched gram that would 
provide a meal for all. 

When I had taken my position, Sher Singh would line up his 
companions and beat the selected cover towards me, shouting 
the loudest of them all and worming his way through the 
thickest cover. When a bird was put up he would yell, 'it's 
coming. Sahib! It’s coming! 1 Or when a heavy animal went 
crashing through the undergrowth, as very frequently 
happened, he would call to his companions not to run away, 
assuring them that it was only a sambhar, or a chital, or maybe 
a sounder of pig. Ten to twelve patches of cover would be 
beaten in the course of the day, yielding as many pea fowl and 
jungle fowl, and two or three hares, and possibly a small pig or 
a porcupine. At the end of the last beat the bag would be 



shared out among the beaters and the gun, or if the bag was 
small only among the beaters and Sher Singh was never more 
happy than when, at the end of the day, he made for home with 
a peacock in full plumage proudly draped over his shoulders. 

Punwa was now married, and the day was fast approaching 
when Sher Singh would have to leave the home, for there was 
not sufficient room on the small holding of six acres for the two 
brothers. Knowing that it would break Sher Singh's heart to 
leave the village and his beloved jungles, I decided to 
apprentice him to a friend who had a garage at Kathgodam, 
and who ran a fleet of cars on the Naini Tal motor road. After 
his training it was my intention to employ Sher Singh to drive 
our car and accompany me on my shooting trips during the 
winter, and to look after our cottage and garden at Kaladhungi 
while we were in Naini Tal during the summer. Sher Singh was 
speechless with delight when I told him of the plans I had made 
for him, plans which ensured his continued residence in the 
village, and within sight and calling distance of the home he 
had never left from the day of his birth. Plans a-many we make 
in life, and I am not sure there is cause for regret when some 
go wrong. Sher Singh was to have started his apprenticeship 
when we returned to Kaladhungi in November. In October he 
contracted malignant malaria which led to pneumonia, and a 
few days before we arrived he died. During his boyhood's years 
he had sung through life happy as the day was long and, had he 
lived, who can say that his life in a changing world would have 
been as happy, and as carefree, as those first few years? Before 
leaving our home for a spell, to regain in new climes the health 
we lost in Hitler's war, I called together our tenants and their 
families as I had done on two previous occasions, to tell them 
the time had come for them to take over their holdings and run 
the village for themselves. Punwa's mother was the spokesman 
for the tenants on this occasion, and after I had had my say she 
got to her feet and, in her practical way, spoke as follows: 'You 
have called us away from our work to no purpose. We have told 
you before and we tell you again that we will not take your land 



from you, for to do so would imply that we were no longer your 
people. And now. Sahib, what about the pig, the son of the 
shaitan who climbed your wall and ate my potatoes? Punwa 
and these others cannot shoot it and I am tired of sitting up all 
night and beating a tin can. 1 

Maggie and I were walking along the fire-track that skirts the 
foothills with David at our heels when the pig— worthy son of 
the old shaitan who, full of years and pellets of buckshot, had 
been killed in an all-night fight with a tiger— trotted across the 
track. 

The sun had set and the range was long— all of three hundred 
yards— but a shot was justifiable for the pig was quite 
evidently on his way to the village. I adjusted the sights and, 
resting the rifle against a tree, waited until the pig paused at 
the edge of a deep depression. When I pressed the trigger, the 
pig jumped into the depression, scrambled out on the far side, 
and made off at top speed. 'Have you missed him?' asked 
Maggie, and with his eyes David put the same question. There 
was no reason, except miscalculation of the range, why I 
should not have hit the pig, for my silver foresight had shown 
up clearly on his black skin, and the tree had assisted me to 
take steady aim. Anyway, it was time to make for home, and as 
the cattle track down which the pig had been going would lead 
us to the Boar Bridge we set off to see the result of my shot. 

The pig's feet had bitten deeply into the ground where he had 
taken off, and on the far side of the depression, where he had 
scrambled out, there was blood. Two hundred yards in the 
direction in which the pig had gone there was a narrow strip of 
dense cover. I should probably find him dead in the morning in 
this cover, for the blood trail was heavy; but if he was not dead 
and there was trouble, Maggie would not be with me, and there 
would be more light to shoot by in the morning than there was 
now. 

Punwa had heard my shot and was waiting on the bridge for us. 
'Yes', I said, in reply to his eager inquiry,'it was the old pig I 



fired at, and judging by the blood trail, he is hit hard. 1 I added 
that if he met me on the bridge next morning I would show him 
where the pig was, so that later he could take out a party of 
men to bring it in. 'May I bring the old havildar too?' said 
Punwa, and I agreed. 

The havildar, a kindly old man who had won the respect and 
affection of all, was a Gurkha who on leaving the army had 
joined the police, and having retired a year previously had 
settled down with his wife and two sons on a plot of land we 
had given him in our village. Like all Gurkhas the havildar had 
an insatiable appetite for pig's flesh, and when a pig was shot 
by any of us it was an understood thing that, no matter who 
went short, the ex-soldier-policeman must have his share. 
Punwa and the havildar were waiting for me at the bridge next 
morning. Following the cattle track, we soon reached the spot 
where, the previous evening, I had seen the blood. From here 
we followed the well- defined blood trail which led us, as I had 
expected, to the dense cover. I left my companions at the edge 
of the cover, for a wounded pig is a dangerous animal, and with 
one exception— a bear— is the only animal in our jungles that 
has the unpleasant habit of savaging any human being who has 
the misfortune to be attacked and knocked down by him. For 
this reason wounded pigs, especially if they have big tusks, 
have to be treated with great respect. The pig had stopped 
where I had expected him to, but he had not died, and at 
daybreak he had got up from where he had been lying all night 
and left the cover. I whistled to Punwa and the havildar and 
when they rejoined me we set off to trail the animal. 

The trail led us across the fire-track, and from the direction in 
which the wounded animal was going it was evident he was 
making for the heavy jungle on the far side of the hill, from 
which I suspected he had come the previous evening. The 
morning blood trail was light and continued to get lighter the 
farther we went, until we lost it altogether in a belt of trees, 
the fallen leaves of which a gust of wind had disturbed. In front 
of us at this spot was a tinder-dry stretch of waist-high grass. 



Still under the conviction that the pig was heading for the 
heavy jungle on the far side of the hill, I entered the grass, 
hoping to pick up the tracks again on the far side. 

The havildar had lagged some distance behind, but Punwa was 
immediately behind me when, after we had gone a few yards 
into the grass, my woollen stockings caught on the thorns of a 
low bush. While I was stooping to free myself, Punwa, to avoid 
the thorns, moved a few paces to the right and I just got free 
and was straightening up when out of the grass shot the pig 
and with an angry grunt went straight for Punwa, who was 
wearing a white shirt. I then did what I have always asked 
companions who have accompanied me into the jungles after 
dangerous game to do if they saw me attacked by a wounded 
animal. I threw the muzzle of my rifle into the air, and shouted 
at the top of my voice as I pressed the trigger. 

If the thorns had not caught in my stockings and lost me a 
fraction of a second, all would have been well, for I should have 
killed the pig before it got to Punwa; but once the pig had 
reached him the only thing I could do to help him was to try to 
cause a diversion, for to have fired in his direction would 
further have endangered his life. As the bullet was leaving my 
rifle to land in the jungle a mile away, Punwa, with adespairing 
scream of 'Sahib 1 , was falling backwards into the grass with the 
pig right on top of him, but at my shout and the crack of the 
rifle the pig turned like a whiplash straight for me, and before I 
was able to eject the spent cartridge and ram a fresh one into 
the chamber of the -275 rifle, he was at me. Taking my right 
hand from the rifle I stretched the arm out palm downwards, 
and as my hand came in contact with his forehead he stopped 
dead, for no other reason than that my time had not come, for 
he was big and angry enough to have knocked over and 
savaged a cart horse. The pig's body had stopped but his head 
was very active, and as he cut upwards with his great tusks, 
first on one side and then on the other, fortunately cutting only 
the air, he wore the skin off the palm of my hand with his rough 
forehead. Then, for no apparent reason, he turned away, and as 



he made off I put two bullets into him in quick succession and 
he pitched forward on his head. 

After that one despairing scream Punwa had made no sound or 
movement, and with the awful thought of what I would say to 
his mother, and the still more awful thought of what she would 
say to me, I went with fear and trembling to where he was 
lying out of sight in the grass, expecting to find him ripped 
open from end to end. He was laying full stretch on his back, 
and his eyes were closed, but to my intense relief I saw no 
blood on his white clothes. I shook him by the shoulder and 
asked him how he was, and where he had been hurt. In a very 
weak voice he said he was dead, and that his back was broken. 

I straddled his body and gently raised him to a sitting position, 
and was overjoyed to find that he was able to retain this 
position when I released my hold. Passing my hand down his 
back I assured him that it was not broken, and after he had 
verified this fact with his own hand, he turned his head and 
looked behind him to where a dry stump was projecting two or 
three inches above the ground. Evidently he had fainted when 
the pig knocked him over and, on coming to, feeling the stump 
boring into his back, had jumped to the conclusion that it was 
broken. 

And so the old pig, son of the shaitan, died, and in dying nearly 
frightened the lives out of two of us. But beyond rubbing a little 
skin off my hand he did us no harm, for Punwa escaped without 
a scratch and with a grand story to tell. The havildar, like the 
wise old soldier he was, had remained in the background. None 
the less he claimed a lion's share of the pig, for had he not 
stood foursquare in reserve to render assistance if assistance 
had been called for? And further, was it not the custom for 
those present at a killing to receive a double share, and what 
difference was there between seeing and hearing the shots that 
had killed the pig? So a double share was not denied him, and 
he too, in the course of time, had a grand story to tell of the 
part he took in that morning's exploit. 



Punwa now reigns, and is raising a family, in the house I built 
for his father. Kunthi has left the village to join her husband, 
and Sher Singh waits in the Happy Hunting Grounds. Punwa's 
mother is still alive, and if you stop at the village gate and walk 
through the fields to Punwa's house you will find her keeping 
house for Punwa and his family and working as hard and as 
cheerfully at her thousand and one tasks as she worked when 
she first came to our village as Mothi's bride. During the war 
years Maggie spent the winters alone in our cottage at 
Kaladhungi, without transport, and fourteen miles from the 
nearest settlement. Her safety gave me no anxiety, for I knew 
she was safe among my friends, the poor of India. 



IV - Pre-Red-Tape Days 

I WAS camping with Anderson one winter in the Terai, the low- 
lying stretch of country at the foot of the Himalayas, and 
having left Bindukhera after breakfast one morning in early 
January we made a wide detour to Boksar, our next camping- 
place, to give our servants time to pack up and pitch our tents 
before our arrival. 

There were two small unbridged rivers to cross between 
Bindukhera and Boksar, and at the second of these rivers one 
of the camels carrying our tents slipped on the clay bottom and 
deposited its load in the river. This accident resulted in a long 
delay, with the result that we arrived at Boksar, after a very 
successful day's black partridge shooting, while our kit was still 
being unloaded from the camels. The camp site was only a few 
hundred yards from Boksar village, and as Anderson's arrival 
was a great event, the entire population had turned out to pay 
their respects to him and to render what assistance they could 
in setting up our camp. 

Sir Frederick Anderson was at that time Superintendent of the 
Terai and Bhabar Government Estates, and by reason of the 
large amount of the milk of human kindness that he was 
endowed with he had endeared himself to the large population, 
embracing all castes and creeds, living in the many thousands 
of square miles of country he ruled over. In addition to his 
kindly nature, Anderson was a great administrator and was 
gifted with a memory which I have only seen equalled in one 
other man. General Sir Henry Ramsay, who for twenty-eight 
years administered the same tract of country, and who 
throughout his service was known as the Uncrowned King of 
Kumaon. Both Ramsay and Anderson were Scotsmen, and it 
was said of them that once having heard a name or seen a face 
they never forgot it. It is only those who have had dealings with 
simple uneducated people who can realize the value of a good 
memory, for nothing appeals so much to a humble man as the 
remembering of his name, or the circumstances in which he 



has previously been met. 

When the history of the rise and fall of British Imperialism is 
written, due consideration will have to be given to the 
important part red tape played in the fall of the British raj. 

Both Ramsay and Anderson served India at a time when red 
tape was unknown, and their popularity and the success of 
their administration was in great measure due to their hands' 
not being tied with it. 

Ramsay, in addition to being Judge of Kumaon, was also 
magistrate, policeman, forest officer, and engineer, and as his 
duties were manifold and onerous he performed many of them 
while walking from one camp to another. It was his custom 
while on these long walks, and while accompanied by a crowd 
of people, to try all his civil and criminal cases. The 
complainant and his witnesses were first heard, and then the 
defendant and his witnesses, and after due deliberation, 
Ramsay would pronounce judgment, which might be either a 
fine or a sentence to imprisonment. In no case was his 
judgment known to be questioned, nor did any man whom he 
had sentenced to a fine or imprisonment fail to pay the fine into 
the Government Treasury or fail to report himself at the 
nearest jail to carry out the term of simple or rigorous 
imprisonment to which Ramsay had sentenced him. As 
Superintendent of the Terai and Bhabar, Anderson had only to 
perform a part of the duties that had been performed by his 
predecessor Ramsay, but he had wide administrative powers, 
and that afternoon, while our tents were being pitched on the 
camping ground at Boksar, Anderson told the assembled people 
to sit down, adding that he would listen to any complaints they 
had to make and receive any petitions they wished to present. 

The first petition came from the headman of a village adjoining 
Boksar. It appeared that this village and Boksar had a joint 
irrigation channel that served both villages, and that ran 
through Boksar. Owing to the partial failure of the monsoon 
rains, the water in the channel had not been sufficient for both 



villages and Boksar village had used it all, with the result that 
the paddy crop of the lower village had been ruined. The 
headman of Boksar admitted that no water had been allowed to 
go down the channel to the lower village and justified his 
action by pointing out that, if the water had been shared, the 
paddy crops of both villages would have been ruined. The crop 
had been harvested and threshed a few days before our arrival, 
and after Anderson had heard what the two headmen had to 
say, he ordered that the paddy should be divided up according 
to the acreage of the two villages. The people of Boksar 
acknowledged the justice of this decision, but claimed they 
were entitled to payment of the labour that had been employed 
in harvesting and threshing the crop. To this claim the lower 
village objected on the ground that no request had been made 
to them for help while the Boksar crop was being harvested 
and threshed. Anderson upheld the objection, and while the 
two headmen went off to divide the paddy the next petition was 
presented to him. 

This was from Chadi, accusing Kalu of having abducted his wife 
Tilni. Chadi's complaint was that three weeks previously Kalu 
had made advances to Tilni; that in spite of his protests Kalu 
had persisted in his advances; and that ultimately Tilni had left 
his hut and taken up residence with Kalu. When Anderson 
asked if Kalu was present, a man sitting at the edge of the 
semicircle in front of us stood up and said he was Kalu. 

While the case of the paddy had been under discussion the 
assembled women and girls had shown little interest, for that 
was a matter to be decided by their menfolk. But this abduction 
case, judging from the expression on their faces and the sharp 
intakes of breath, was one in which they were all intensely 
interested. 

When Anderson asked Kalu if he admitted the charge that 
Chadi had brought against him, he admitted that Tilni was 
living in the hut he had provided for her but he stoutly denied 
that he had abducted her. When asked if he was prepared to 



return Tilni to her lawful husband, Kalu replied that Tilni had 
come to him of her own free will and that he was not prepared 
to force her to return to Chadi. 'Is Tilni present ? 1 asked 
Anderson. A girl from among the group of women came 
forward and said, 'I am Tilni. What does Your Honour want with 
me ? 1 

Tilni was a clean-limbed attractive young girl, some eighteen 
years of age. Her hair, done in a foot-high cone in the 
traditional manner of the women of the Terai, was draped with 
a white-bordered black sari, her upper person was encased in a 
tight-fitting red bodice, and a voluminous gaily coloured skirt 
completed her costume. When asked by Anderson why she had 
left her husband, she pointed to Chadi and said, 'Look at him. 
Not only is he dirty, as you can see, but he is also a miser; and 
during the two years I have been married to him he has not 
given me any clothes, nor has he given me any jewellery. These 
clothes that you are looking at and this jewellery', she said, 
touching some silver bangles on her wrists, and several strings 
of glass beads round her neck/ were given to me by Kalu.' 
Asked if she was willing to go back to Chadi, Tilni tossed her 
head and said nothing would induce her to do so. 

This aboriginal tribe, living in the unhealthy Terai, is renowned 
for two sterling qualities— cleanliness, and the independence 
of the women. In no other part of India are villages and the 
individual dwellings as spotlessly clean as they are in the Terai, 
and in no other part of India would a young girl have dared or 
in fact been permitted, to stand before a mixed gathering 
including two white men to plead her own cause. Chadi was 
now asked by Anderson if he had any suggestions to make, to 
which he replied: 'You are my mother and my father. I came to 
you for justice, and if Your Honour is not prepared to compel 
my wife to return to me, I claim compensation for her . 1 'To what 
extent do you claim compensation for her?' asked Anderson, to 
which Chadi replied, 'I claim one hundred and fifty rupees'. 
From all sides of the semicircle there were now exclamations of 
'He claims too much', 'far too much', and 'She is not worth it'. 



On being asked by Anderson if he was willing to pay one 
hundred and fifty rupees for Tilni, Kalu said the price 
demanded was excessive and added that he knew, as everyone 
in Boksar knew, that Chadi had only paid a hundred rupees for 
Tilni. This price, he argued, had been paid for Tilni when she 
was 'new 1 , and as this was no longer the case the most he was 
willing to pay was fifty rupees. The assembled people now took 
sides; some maintaining that the sum demanded was too great, 
while others as vigorously maintained that the sum offered was 
too small. Eventually, after giving due consideration to the 
arguments for and against— arguments that went into very 
minute and very personal details, and to which Tilni listened 
with an amused smile on her pretty face— Anderson fixed the 
price of Tilni at seventy-five rupees, and this sum Kalu was 
ordered to pay Chadi. Opening his waistband, Kalu produced a 
string purse, and emptied it on the carpet at Anderson's feet. 
The contents amounted to fifty-two silver rupees. When two of 
Kalu's friends had come to his assistance and added another 
twenty-three rupees, Chadi was told to count the money. When 
he had done so and stated that the sum was correct, a woman 
whom I had noticed coming very slowly and apparently very 
painfully from the direction of the village after all the others 
were seated and who had sat down a little apart from the rest, 
got with some difficulty to her feet and said, 'What about me. 
Your Honour?' 'Who are you?' asked Anderson. 'I am Kalu's 
wife', she replied. 

She was a tall gaunt woman, every drop of blood drained from 
her ivory-white face, her body-line distorted with an enormous 
spleen, and her feet swollen— the result of malaria, the 
scourge of the Terai. 

In a tired, toneless voice the woman said that now that Kalu 
had purchased another wife she would be homeless; and as she 
had no relatives in the village, and was too ill to work, she 
would die of neglect and starvation. Then she covered her face 
with her sari and began to cry silently, great sobs shaking her 
wasted frame and tears splashing down on her distorted body. 



Here was an unexpected and an unfortunate complication, and 
one that was for Anderson difficult of solution, for while the 
case had been under discussion there had been no hint that 
Kalu already had a wife. 

The uncomfortable silence following on the woman's pitiful 
outburst had lasted some time when Tilni, who had remained 
standing, ran across to the poor weeping woman, and flinging 
her strong young arms round her said, 'Don't cry, sister, don't 
cry; and don't say you are homeless, for I will share the new 
hut Kalu has built for me with you, and I will take care of you 
and nurse you and one half of all that Kalu gives me I will give 
you. So don't cry any more, sister, and now come with me and I 
will take you to our hut.' As Tilni and the sick woman moved 
off, Anderson stood up and, blowing his nose violently, said the 
wind coming down from the hills had given him a damned cold, 
and that the proceedings were closed for the day. The wind 
coming down from the hills appeared to have affected others in 
the same way as it had affected Anderson, for his was not the 
only nose that was in urgent need of blowing. But the 
proceedings were not quite over, for Chadi now approached 
Anderson and asked for the return of his petition. Having torn 
his petition into small bits, Chadi took the piece of cloth in 
which he had tied up the seventy-five rupees from his pocket, 
opened it and said: 'Kalu and I be men of the same village, and 
as he has now two mouths to feed, one of which requires 
special food, he will need all his money. So permit me. Your 
Honour, to return this money to him.' 

While touring his domain, Anderson and his predecessors in 
pre-red-tape days settled to the mutual satisfaction of all 
concerned hundreds, nay thousands, of cases similar to these, 
without the contestants being put to one pice of expense. Now, 
since the introduction of red tape, these cases are taken to 
courts of law where both the complainant and the defendant 
are bled white, and where seeds of dissension are sown that 
inevitably lead to more and more court cases, to the 
enrichment of the legal profession and the ruin of the poor. 



simple, honest, hardworking peasantry. 



V - The Law of the Jungles 

HARKWAR and Kunthi were married before their total ages had 
reached double figures. This was quite normal in the India of 
those days, and would possibly still have been so had Mahatma 
Gandhi and Miss Mayo never lived. Harkwar and Kunthi lived 
in villages a few miles apart at the foot of the great Dunagiri 
Mountain, and had never seen each other until the great day 
when, dressed in bright new clothes, they had for all too short 
a time been the centre of attraction of a vast crowd of relatives 
and friends. That day lived long in their memories as the 
wonderful occasion when they had been able to fill their small 
bellies to bursting-point with halwa and puris. The day also 
lived for long years in the memory of their respective fathers, 
for on it the village bania, who was their 'father and mother', 
realizing their great necessity had provided the few rupees that 
had enabled them to retain the respect of their community by 
marrying their children at the age that which children should 
be married, and on the propitious date selected by the priest of 
the village— and had made a fresh entry against their names in 
his register. 

True, the fifty per cent, interest demanded for the 
accommodation was excessive, but, God willing, a part of it 
would be paid, for there were other children yet to be married, 
and who but the good bania was there to help them? Kunthi 
returned to her father's home after her wedding and for the 
next few years performed all the duties that children are called 
upon to perform in the homes of the very poor. The only 
difference her married state made in her life was that she was 
no longer permitted to wear the one-piece dress that 
unmarried girls wear. Her new costume now consisted of three 
pieces, a chaddar a yard and a half long, one end of which was 
tucked into her skirt and the other draped over her head, a tiny 
sleeveless bodice, and a skirt a few inches long. 

Several uneventful and care free years went by for Kunthi until 
the day came when she was judged old enough to join her 



husband. Once again the bania came to the rescue and, arrayed 
in her new clothes, a very tearful girl-bride set out for the home 
of her boy-husband. The change from one home to another only 
meant for Kunthi the performing of chores for her mother-in- 
law which she had previously performed for her mother. There 
are no drones in a poor man's household in India; young and 
old have their allotted work to do and they do it cheerfully. 
Kunthi was now old enough to help with the cooking, and as 
soon as the morning meal had been eaten all who were capable 
of working for wages set out to perform their respective tasks, 
which, no matter how minor they were, brought grist to the 
family mill. Harkwar's father was a mason and was engaged on 
building a chapel at the American Mission School. I was 
Harkwar's ambition to follow in his father's profession and, 
until he had the strength to do so, he helped the family 
exchequer by carrying the materials used by his father and the 
other masons, earning two annas a day for his ten hours' 
labour. 

The crops on the low irrigated lands were ripening, and after 
Kunthi had washed and polished the metal pots and pans used 
for the morning meal she accompanied her mother-in-law and 
her numerous sisters-in-law to the fields of the headman of the 
village, where with other women and girls she laboured as 
many hours as her husband for half the wage he received. 

When the day's work was done the family walked back in the 
twilight to the hut Harkwar's father had been permitted to 
build on the headman's land, and with the dry sticks the 
younger children had collected during their elders' absence, 
the evening meal was cooked and eaten. Except for the fire, 
there had never been any other form of illumination in the hut, 
and when the pots and pans had been cleaned and put away, 
each member of the family retired to his or her allotted place, 
Harkwar and his brothers sleeping with their father and Kunthi 
sleeping with the other female members of the family. 

When Harkwar was eighteen and Kunthi sixteen, they left and, 
carrying their few possessions, set up home in a hut placed at 



their disposal by an uncle of Harkwar's in a village three miles 
from the cantonment of Ranikhet. A number of barracks were 
under construction in the cantonment and Harkwar had no 
difficulty in finding work as a mason; nor had Kunthi any 
difficulty in finding work as a labourer, carrying stones from a 
quarry to the site of the building. For four years the young 
couple worked on the barracks at Ranikhet, and during this 
period Kunthi had two children. In November of the fourth year 
the buildings were completed and Harkwar and Kunthi had to 
find new work, for their savings were small and would only 
keep them in food for a few days. 

Winter set in early that year and promised to be unusually 
severe. The family had no warm clothes, and after a week's 
unsuccessful search for work Harkwar suggested that they 
should migrate to the foothills where he heard a canal 
headworks was being constructed. 

So, early in December, the family set out in high spirits on their 
long walk to the foothills. The distance between the village in 
which they had made their home for four years and the canal 
headworks at Kaladhungi, where they hoped to procure work, 
was roughly fifty miles. 

Sleeping under trees at night, toiling up and down steep and 
rough roads during the day, and carrying all their worldly 
possessions and the children by turns, Harkwar and Kunthi, 
tired and footsore, accomplished the journey to Kaladhungi in 
six days. 

Other landless members of the depressed class had migrated 
earlier in the winter from the high hills to the foothills and built 
themselves communal huts capable of housing as many as 
thirty families. In these huts Harkwar and Kunthi were unable 
to find accommodation, so they had to build a hut for 
themselves. They chose a site at the edge of the forest where 
there was an abundant supply of fuel, within easy reach of the 
bazaar, and laboured early and late on a small hut of branches 
and leaves, for their supply of hard cash had dwindled to a few 



rupees and there was no friendly bania here to whom they 
could turn for help. 

The forest at the edge of which Harkwar and Kunthi built their 
hut was a favourite hunting-ground of mine. I had first entered 
it carrying my old muzzle-loader to shoot red jungle fowl and 
pea fowl for the family larder, and later I had penetrated to 
every corner, armed with a modern rifle, in search of big game. 
At the time Harkwar and Kunthi and their two children, Punwa, 
a boy aged three, and Putali, a girl aged two, took up their 
residence in the hut, there were in that forest, to my certain 
knowledge, five tigers; eight leopards; a family of four sloth 
bears; two Himalayan black bears, which had come down from 
the high hills to feed on wild plums and honey; a number of 
hyenas who had their burrows in the grasslands five miles 
away and who visited the forest nightly to feed on the 
discarded portions of the tigers' and leopards' kills; a pair of 
wild dogs; numerous jackals and foxes and pine martens; and a 
variety of civet and other cats. 

There were also two pythons, many kinds of snakes, crested 
and tawny eagles, and hundreds of vultures in the forest. I have 
not mentioned animals such as deer, antelope, pigs, and 
monkeys, which are harmless to human beings, for they have 
no part in my story. 

The day after the flimsy hut was completed, Harkwar found 
work as a qualified mason on a daily wage of eight annas with 
the contractor who was building the canal headworks, and 
Kunthi purchased for two rupees a permit from the Forest 
Department which entitled her to cut grass on the foothills, 
which she sold as fodder for the cattle of the shopkeepers in 
the bazaar. For her bundle of green grass weighing anything up 
to eighty pounds and which necessitated a walk of from ten to 
fourteen miles, mostly up and down steep hills, Kunthi received 
four annas, one anna of which was taken by the man who held 
the Government contract for sale of grass in the bazaar. On the 
eight annas earned by Harkwar, plus the three annas earned by 



Kunthi, the family of four lived in comparative comfort, for food 
was plentiful and cheap and for the first time in their lives they 
were able to afford one meat meal a month. 

Two of the three months that Harkwar and Kunthi intended 
spending in Kaladhungi passed very peacefully The hours of 
work were long, and admitted of no relaxation, but to that they 
had been accustomed from childhood. The weather was 
perfect, the children kept in good health, and except during the 
first few days while the hut was being built they had never 
gone hungry. 

The children had in the beginning been an anxiety, for they 
were too young to accompany Harkwar to the canal head 
works, or Kunthi on her long journeys in search of grass. Then 
a kindly old crippled woman living in the communal hut a few 
hundred yards away came to the rescue by offering to keep a 
general eye on the children while the parents were away at 
work. This arrangement worked satisfactorily for two months, 
and each evening when Harkwar returned from the canal 
headworks four miles away, and Kunthi returned a little later 
after selling her grass in the bazaar, they found Punwa and 
Putali eagerly awaiting their return. Friday was fair day in 
Kaladhungi and on that day everyone in the surrounding 
villages made it a point to visit the bazaar, where open booths 
were erected for the display of cheap food, fruit, and 
vegetables. On these fair days Harkwar and Kunthi returned 
from work half an hour before their usual time, for if any 
vegetables had been left over it was possible to buy them at a 
reduced price before the booths closed down for the night. 

One particular Friday, when Harkwar and Kunthi returned to 
the hut after making their modest purchases of vegetables and 
a pound of goat's meat, Punwa and Putali were not at the hut to 
welcome them. On making inquiries from the crippled woman 
at the communal hut, they learned that she had not seen the 
children since midday. The woman suggested that they had 
probably gone to the bazaar to see a merry- go-round that had 



attracted all the children from the communal hut, and as this 
seemed a reasonable explanation Harkwar set off to search the 
bazaar while Kunthi returned to the hut to prepare the evening 
meal. An hour later Harkwar returned with several men who 
had assisted him in his search to report that no trace of the 
children could be found, and that of all the people he had 
questioned, none admitted having seen them. 

At that time a rumour was running through the length and 
breadth of India of the kidnapping of Hindu children by fakirs, 
for sale on the north-west frontier for immoral purposes. 

What truth there was in this rumour I am unable to say, but I 
had frequently read in the daily press of fakirs being man 
handled, and on several occasions being rescued by the police 
from crowds intent on lynching them. It is safe to say that 
every parent in India had heard these rumours, and when 
Harkwar and the friends who had helped him in his search 
returned to the hut, they communicated their fears to Kunthi 
that the children had been kidnapped by fakirs, who had 
probably come to the fair for that purpose. At the lower end of 
the village there was a police station in charge of a head 
constable and two constables. To this police station Harkwar 
and Kunthi repaired, with a growing crowd of well-wishers. The 
head constable was a kindly old man who had children of his 
own, and after lie had listened sympathetically to the distracted 
parents' story, and recorded their statements in his diary, he 
said -that nothing could be done that night, but that next 
morning he would send the town crier round to all the fifteen 
villages in Kaladhungi to announce the loss of the children. He 
then suggested that if the town crier could announce a reward 
of fifty rupees, it would greatly assist in the safe return of the 
children. Fifty rupees! Harkwar and Kunthi were aghast at the 
suggestion, for they did not know there was so much money in 
all the world. However when the town crier set out on his 
round the following morning, he was able to announce the 
reward, for a man in Kaladhungi who had heard of the head 
constable's suggestion had offered the money. The evening 



meal was eaten late that night. The childrens' portion was laid 
aside, and through out the night a small fire was kept burning, 
for it was bitterly cold, and at short intervals Harkwar and 
Kunthi went out into the night to call to their children, though 
they knew there was no hope of receiving an answer. 

At Kaladhungi two roads cross each other at right angles, one 
running along the foot of the hills from Haldwani to Ramnagar, 
and the other running from Naini Tal to Bazpur. During that 
Friday night, sitting close to the small fire to keep themselves 
warm, Harkwar and Kunthi decided that if the children did not 
turn up by morning, they would go along the former road and 
make inquiries, as this was the most likely route for the 
kidnappers to have taken. At day break on Saturday morning 
they went to the police station to tell the head constable of 
their decision, and were instructed to lodge a report at the 
Haldwani and Ramnagar police stations. They were greatly 
heartened when the head constable told them that he was 
sending a letter by mail runner to no less a person than the 
Inspector of Police at Haldwani, requesting him to telegraph to 
all railway junctions to keep a look-out for the children, a 
description of whom he was sending with his letter. 

Near sunset that evening Kunthi returned from her twenty- 
eight-mile walk to Haldwani and went straight to the police 
station to inquire about her children and to tell the head 
constable that, though her quest had been fruitless, she had 
lodged a report as instructed at the Haldwani police station. 
Shortly afterwards Harkwar returned from his thirty-six-mile 
walk to Ramnagar, and he too went straight to the police 
station to make inquiries and to report that he had found no 
trace of the children, but had carried out the head constable's 
instructions. Many friends, including a number of mothers who 
feared for the safety of their own children, were waiting at the 
hut to express their sympathy for Harkwar and for Punwa's 
mother— for, as is the custom in India, Kunthi when she 
married lost the name she had been given at birth, and until 
Punwa was born had been addressed and referred to as 



'Harkwar's wife', and after Punwa's birth as 'Punwa's mother. 

Sunday was a repetition of Saturday with the difference that 
instead of going east and west, Kunthi went north to Naini Tal 
while Harkwar went south to Bazpur. The former covered thirty 
miles, and the latter thirty-two. Starting early and returning at 
nightfall, the distracted parents traversed many miles of rough 
roads through dense forests, where people do not usually go 
except in large parties, and where Harkwar and Kunthi would 
not have dreamed of going alone had not anxiety for their 
children overcome their fear of dacoits and of wild animals. 

On that Sunday evening, weary and hungry, they returned to 
their hut from their fruitless visit to Naini Tal and to Bazpur, to 
be met by the news that the town crier's visit to the villages 
and the police inquiries had failed to find any trace of the 
children. Then they lost heart and gave up all hope of ever 
seeing Punwa and Putali again. The anger of the gods, that had 
resulted in a fakir being able to steal their children in broad 
daylight, was not to be explained. Before starting on their long 
walk from the hills-they had consulted the village priest, and he 
had selected the propitious day for them to set out on their 
journey. At every shrine they had passed they had made the 
requisite offering; at one place, a dry bit of wood, in another a 
small strip of cloth torn from the hem of Kunthi's chaddar, and 
in yet another a pice, which they could ill afford. And here, at 
Kaladhungi, every time they passed the temple that their low 
caste did not permit them to enter; they had never failed to 
raise their clasped hands in supplication. Why then had this 
great misfortune befallen them, who had done all that the gods 
demanded of them and who had never wronged any man? 

Monday found the pair too dispirited and too tired to leave 
their hut. There was no food, and would be none until they 
resumed work. But of what use was it to work now, when the 
children for whom they had ungrudgingly laboured from morn 
to night were gone? So, while friends came and went, offering 
what sympathy they could, Hark-war sat at the door of the hut 



staring into a bleak and hopeless future, while Kunthi, her 
tears all gone, sat in a corner, hour after hour, rocking herself 
to and fro, to and fro. 

On that Monday a man of my acquaintance was herding 
buffaloes in the jungle in which lived the wild animals and birds 
I have mentioned. He was a simple soul who had spent the 
greater part of his life in the jungles herding the buffaloes of 
the headman at Patabpur village. He knew the danger from 
tigers, and near sundown he collected the buffaloes and started 
to drive them to the village, along a cattle track that ran 
through the densest part of the jungle. Presently he noticed 
that as each buffalo got to a certain spot in the track it turned 
its head to the right and stopped, until urged on by the horns of 
the animal following. When he got to this spot he also turned 
his head to the right, and in a little depression a few feet from 
the track saw two small children lying. 

Man had been in the jungle with his buffaloes when the town 
crier had made his round of the villages on Saturday, but that 
night, and the following night also, the kidnapping of 
Harkwar's children had been the topic of conversation round 
the village fire, as in fact it had been round every village fire in 
the whole of Kaladhungi. Here then were the missing children 
for whom a reward of fifty rupees had been offered. 

But why had they been murdered and brought to this remote 
spot? The children were naked, and were clasped in each 
other's arms. The herdsman descended into the depression and 
squatted down on his hunkers to determine, if he could, how 
the children had met their death. That the children were dead 
he was convinced, yet now as he sat closely scrutinizing them 
he suddenly saw that they were breathing; that in fact they 
were not dead, but sound asleep. He was a father himself, and 
very gently he touched the children and roused them. To touch 
them was a crime against his caste, for he was a Brahmin and 
they were low-caste children, but what mattered caste in an 
emergency like this? So, leaving his buffaloes to find their own 



way home, he picked up the children, who were too weak to 
walk, and set out for the Kaladhungi bazaar with one on each 
shoulder. The man was not too strong himself, for like all who 
live in the foothills he had suffered much from malaria. 

The children were an awkward load and had to be held in 
position. Moreover, as all the cattle tracks and game paths in 
this jungle run from north to south, and his way lay from east 
to west, he had to make frequent detours to avoid impenetrable 
thickets and deep ravines. But he carried on manfully, resting 
every now and then in the course of his six-mile walk. Putali 
was beyond speech, but Punwa was able to talk a little and all 
the explanation he could give for their being in the jungle was 
that they had been playing and had got lost. 

Harkwar was sitting at the door of his hut staring into the 
darkening night, in which points of light were beginning to 
appear as a lantern or cooking-fire was lit here and there, when 
he saw a small crowd of people appearing from the direction of 
the bazaar. At the head of the procession a man was walking, 
carrying something on his shoulders. From all sides people 
were converging on the procession and he could hear an 
excited murmur of 'Harkwar's children'. Harkwar's children. 

He could not believe his ears, and yet there appeared to be no 
mistake, for the procession was coming straight towards his 
hut. 

Kunthi, having reached the limit of her misery and of her 
physical endurance, had fallen asleep curled up in a corner of 
the hut. Harkwar shook her awake and got her to the door just 
as the herdsman carrying Punwa and Putali reached it. When 
the tearful greetings, and blessings and thanks for the rescuer, 
and the congratulations of friends had partly subsided, the 
question of the reward the herdsman had earned was mooted. 
To a poor man fifty rupees was wealth, untold, and with it the 
herdsman could buy three buffaloes or ten cows, and be 
independent for life. But the rescuer was a better man than the 
crowd gave him credit for. The blessings and thanks that had 



been showered on his head that night, he said, was reward 
enough for him, and he stoutly refused to touch one pice of the 
fifty rupees. Nor would Harkwar or Kunthi accept the reward 
either as a gift or a loan. They had got back the children they 
had lost all hope of ever seeing again, and would resume work 
as their strength returned. In the meantime the milk and 
sweets and puris that one and another of the assembled people, 
out of the goodness of their hearts, had run to the bazaar to 
fetch would be amply sufficient to sustain them. 

Two-year-old Putali and three-year-old Punwa were lost at 
midday on Friday, and were found by the herdsman at about 5 
p.m. on Monday, a matter of seventy-seven hours. I have given 
a description of the wild life which to my knowledge was in the 
forest in which the children spent those seventy-seven hours, 
and it would be unreasonable to assume that none of the 
animals or birds saw, heard, or smelt the children. And yet, 
when the herdsman put Putali and Punwa into their parents' 
arms, there was not a single mark of tooth or claw on them. I 
once saw a tigress stalking a month-old kid. The ground was 
very open and the kid saw the tigress while she was still some 
distance away and started bleating, where on the tigress gave 
up her stalk and walked straight up to it. When the tigress had 
approached to within a few yards, the kid went forward to meet 
her, and on reaching the tigress stretched out its neck and put 
up its head to smell her. For the duration of a few heart beats 
the month-old kid and the Queen of the Forest stood nose to 
nose, and 'then the queen turned and walked off in the 
direction from which she had come. 

Illustration from the 1952 Readers Digest condensed printing 
of the chapter 'Law of the Jungle' from My India. 

When Hitler's war was nearing its end, in one week I read 
extracts from speeches of three of the greatest men in the 
British Empire, condemning war atrocities, and accusing the 
enemy of attempting to introduce the 'law of the jungle 1 into 
the dealings of warring man and man. Had the Creator made 



the same law for man as He has made for the jungle folk, there 
would be no wars, for the strong in man would have the same 
consideration for the weak as is the established law of the 
jungles. 



VI - The Brothers 

THE long years of training boys for jungle warfare were over, 
and we were sitting one morning after breakfast on the 
veranda of our cottage at Kaladhungi. My sister Maggie was 
knitting a khaki pullover for me, and I was putting the finishing 
touches to a favourite fly-rod that suffered from years of disuse, 
when a man wearing a clean but much-patched cotton suit 
walked up the steps of the veranda with a broad grin on his 
face, salaamed, and asked if we remembered him. 

Many people, clean and not so clean, old and young, rich and 
poor (but mostly poor), Hindus, Mohammedans, and Christians, 
walked up those steps, for our cottage was at a cross-roads at 
the foot of the hills and on the border line between the 
cultivated land and the forest. All who were sick or sorry, in 
want of a helping hand, or in need of a little human 
companionship and a cup of tea, whether living on the 
cultivated land or working in the forest or just passing on their 
way from one place to another, found their way to our cottage. 
Had a record been maintained over the years of only the sick 
and injured treated, it would have had thousands of names in 
it. And the cases dealt with would have covered every ailment 
that human flesh is heir to— and subject to, when living in an 
unhealthy area, working in forests on dangerous jobs among 
animals who occasionally lose their tempers. 

There was the case of the woman who came one morning and 
complained that her son had great difficulty in eating the 
linseed poultice that had been given to her the previous 
evening to apply on a boil: as the poultice did not appear to 
have done the boy any good, she asked to have the medicine 
changed. And the case of the old Mohammedan woman who 
came late one evening, with tears streaming down her face, 
and begged Maggie to save her husband who was dying of 
pneumonia. She looked a glance at the tablets of M. & B. 693 
and asked if that was all that was to be given to a dying man to 
make him well; but next day she returned with a beaming 



countenance to report that her husband had recovered, and 
begged for the same kind of medicine for the four friends she 
had brought with her, each of whom had husbands as old as 
hers who might at any time get pneumonia. And there was the 
case of the girl about eight years old, who, after some difficulty 
in reaching the latch of the gate, marched up to the veranda 
firmly holding the hand of a boy some two years younger, and 
asked for medicine for the boy's sore eyes. She sat herself 
down on the ground, made the boy lie on his back, and having 
got his head between her knees said, 'Now, Miss Sahib, you can 
do anything you like to him.' This girl was the daughter of the 
headman of a village six miles away. Seeing her class mate 
suffering from sore eyes, she had taken it upon herself to bring 
him to Maggie for treatment, and for a whole week, until his 
eyes were quite well, the young Samaritan brought the boy to 
the cottage, though in order to do so she had to walk an 
additional four miles each day. Then there was the case of the 
sawyer from Delhi, who limped into the compound one day with 
his right leg ripped open by the tusk of a pig from his heel to 
the back of his knee. All the time his leg was being attended to 
he swore at the unclean beast that had done this terrible thing 
to him, for he was a follower of the Prophet. His story was that 
when that morning he had approached the tree he had felled 
the previous day, to saw it up, a pig which had been sheltering 
among the branches ran against him and cut his leg. When I 
suggested that it was his own fault for having got in the way of 
the pig, he indignantly exclaimed: 'With the whole jungle to run 
about in, what need was there for it to have run against me 
when I had done nothing, to offend it, and in fact before I had 
even seen it?' 

There was another sawyer too. While turning over a log he had 
been stung on the palm of his hand by a scorpion 'as big as 
this'. After treatment, he rolled on the ground loudly lamenting 
his fate and asserting that the medicine was doing him no 
good, but not long after he was observed to be holding his sides 
and choking with laughter. It was the day of the children's 



annual fete, and when the races had been run and the two 
hundred children and their mothers had been fed on sweets 
and fruit, a circle had been formed. A blindfolded boy had been 
set to break a paper bag containing nuts of all kinds, which was 
slung between two bamboos held upright by two men; and it 
was when the boy brought his stick down on the head of one of 
these men that the scorpion patient was found to be laughing 
the loudest of all the assembly When asked how the pain now 
was, the man replied that it had gone, and that in any case he 
would not mind how many scorpions stung him provided he 
could take part in a tamasha like this. 

The members of our family have been amateur physicians for 
more years than I can remember, and as Indians, especially the 
poorer ones, have long memories, and never forget a kindness 
no matter how trivial it may have been, not all the people who 
walked up the steps of our cottage at Kaladhungi were 
patients. Many there were who had marched for days over 
rough tracks in all weathers to thank us for small kindnesses 
shown to them, maybe the previous year, or maybe many years 
previously. 

One of these was a sixteen-year-old boy, who with his mother 
had been housed for some days in our village while Maggie 
treated his mother for influenza and badly inflamed eyes; now 
he had done a march of many days to bring Maggie his 
mother's thanks and a present of a few pomegranates which his 
mother had picked for her 'with her own hand '. And only that 
day, an hour before the man wearing the patched suit had 
arrived, an old man had walked up the steps and seated himself 
on the veranda with his back to one of the pillars and, after 
looking at me for some time, had shaken his head in a 
disapproving manner and said, 'You are looking much older. 
Sahib, than you were when I last saw you.' 'Yes', I replied, 'all 
of us are apt to look older after ten years.' 'Not all of us. Sahib,' 
he rejoined, 'for I look and feel no older than when I last sat in 
your veranda not ten, but twelve years ago. On that occasion I 
was returning on foot from a pilgrimage to Badrinath, and 



seeing your gate open, and being tired and in urgent need of 
ten rupees, I asked you to let me rest for a while, and appealed 
to you for help. I am now returning from another pilgrimage, 
this time to the sacred city of Benares. I am in no need of 
money and have only come to thank you for the help you gave 
me before and to tell you that I got home safely. After this 
smoke, and a little rest, I shall return to rejoin my family, whom 
I left at Haldwani. 1 A fourteen-mile walk each way. And in spite 
of his assertion that twelve years had not made him look or feel 
any older, he was a frail old man. 

Though the face of the man in the patched cotton suit who now 
stood before us on the veranda was vaguely familiar, we could 
not remember his name or the circumstances in which we had 
last seen him. Seeing that he was not recognized, the man 
removed his coat, opened his shirt, and exposed his chest and 
right shoulder. That shoulder brought him to instant memory. 
He was Narwa. Narwa the basket-maker, and there was some 
excuse for our not having recognized him, for when we had last 
seen him, six years previously, he was mere skin and bone; only 
with great difficulty had he been able to put one foot before 
another, and he had needed a stick to support himself. Looking 
now at his misshapen shoulder, the crushed and broken bones 
of which had calloused without being set, the puckered and 
discoloured skin of his chest and back, and his partially 
withered right arm, we who for three months had watched his 
gallant fight for life marvelled how well he had survived his 
ordeal. Moving his arm up and down, and closing and opening 
his hand, Narwa said that his arm was getting stronger every 
day. His fingers had not got stiff, as we feared they would, so 
he had been able to resume his trade. His object now, he said, 
was to show us that he was quite well and to thank Maggie — 
which he proceeded to do by putting his head on her feet— for 
having supplied all his wants, and the wants of his wife and 
child, during the months he had lain between life and death. 

Narwa and Haria were not blood brothers, though they so 
described themselves. They had been born and had grown up 



in the same village near Almora, and when old enough to work 
had adopted the same profession, basket-making— which 
means that they wereuntouchables, for in the United Provinces 
baskets are only made by untouchables. During the summer 
months Narwa and Haria worked at their trade in their village 
near Almora, and in the winter months they came down to 
Kaladhungi where there was a great demand for the huge 
baskets, measuring up to fifteen feet in diameter, which they 
made for our villagers for the storage of grain. In their hill 
village near Almora they made their baskets of ringals— thin 
bamboo an inch thick and up to twenty feet long, which grows 
at an altitude of four to ten thousand feet, and which 
incidentally makes the most perfect of fly- rods — and in 
Kaladhungi they made them of bamboos. 

The bamboos in Kaladhungi grow in the Government Reserved 
Forests, and we who cultivate land near the Reserved Forests 
are permitted to cut a certain number each year for our 
personal use. But people who use the bamboos for commercial 
purposes have to take out a licence from the forest guard of the 
area, paying two annas per headload, and a small consideration 
to the forest guard for his trouble in filling in the licence. As 
the licence is a personal one and covers an individual headload 
it is safe to assume that as many lengths of two-year-old 
bamboos— the age when a bamboo is best for basket-making— 
were included in the load as a man could carry. 

At daybreak on the morning of 26 December 1939 Narwa and 
Haria set out from their communal hut near the bazaar at 
Kaladhungi to walk eight miles to Nalni village, obtain a licence 
from the forest guard, cut two headloads of bamboos in the 
Nalni Reserved Forests, and return to Kaladhungi the same 
evening. It was bitterly cold when they started, so the two men 
wrapped coarse cotton sheets round their shoulders to keep 
out the cold. For a mile their way ran along the canal bank. 
Then, after negotiating the series of high walls which form the 
headworks of the canal, they took a footpath which runs 
alternately through patches of dense scrub jungle and over 



long stretches of the boulder-strewn bank of the Boar river, 
stretches where a pair of otters are usually to be seen in the 
early morning, and where, when the sun is on the water, 
mahseer up to three or four pounds can be taken on a fly-rod. 
Two miles up they crossed by a shallow ford from the right to 
the left bank of the river and entered a tree and grass jungle, 
where morning and evening are to be seen several small herds 
of chital and sambhar, and an occasional kakar, leopard, or 
tiger. A mile through this jungle, they came to where the hills 
converge, and where some years previously Robin picked up 
the tracks of the Bachelor of Powalgarh. From this point 
onwards the valley opens out and is known to all who graze 
cattle, or who poach or shoot in the area, as Samal Chour. In 
this valley one has to walk warily, for the footpath is used 
almost as much by tigers as it is by human beings. 

At the upper end of the valley the footpath, before going 
steeply up the hill for two miles to Nalni village, passes through 
a strip of grass. This strip of eight-foot grass is thirty yards 
wide and extends for about fifty yards on either side of the 
path. In anticipation of the stiff climb up the Nalni hill, shortly 
before reaching the grass Narwa divested himself of his cotton 
sheet, folded it small and placed it on his right shoulder. Haria 
was leading, with Narwa following a few steps behind, and he 
had only gone three or four yards into the grass when he heard 
the angry roar of a tiger, and simultaneously a shriek from 
Narwa. Haria turned and dashed back, and on the open ground 
at the edge of the grass he saw Narwa on his back with a tiger 
lying diagonally across him. Narwa's feet were nearest to him, 
and grasping an ankle in each hand he started to pull him away 
from under the tiger. As he did this the tiger stood up, turned 
towards him and started to growl. After dragging Narwa along 
on his back for a short distance Haria got his arms round him 
and set him on his feet. But Narwa was too badly injured and 
shaken to stand or walk, so Haria put his arms round him, and 
alternately dragged and carried him— while the tiger 
continued to growl— through the open ground skirting the 



grass, and so regained the path to Nalni village. By 
superhuman efforts Haria eventually got Narwa to Nalni, 
where it was found that in spite of the folded sheet which he 
had been carrying on his right shoulder, and which Haria had 
retrieved while pulling him away, the tiger had crushed the 
bones of the shoulder, lacerated the flesh, and exposed the 
bones on the right side of the chest and back. All four of the 
tiger's canine teeth had penetrated some eight folds of the 
sheet, and but for this obstruction they would have met in 
Narwa's chest and inflicted a fatal wound. The forest guard and 
the people of Nalni were unable to do anything for Narwa, so 
Haria hired a pack pony for two rupees, mounted Narwa on it, 
and set out for Kaladhungi. The distance, as I have already 
said, was eight miles, but Haria was unwilling to face the tiger 
a second time so he made a wide detour through Musabanga 
village, adding ten miles to Narwa's agonizing journey. There 
were no saddles at Nalni and he had been mounted on a hard 
pack used for carrying grain, and the first nine miles of his ride 
was over incredibly steep and rough ground. 

Maggie was having tea on the veranda of our cottage when 
Narwa, soaked in blood and being held on the pony by Haria, 
arrived at the steps. A glance was enough to show that the case 
was one she could not deal with, so she quickly gave Narwa a 
stiff dose of sal volatile— for he was on the point of fainting— 
and made a sling for his arm. Then she tore up a bed sheet to 
be used for bandages and wrote a note to the Assistant 
Surgeon in charge of the Kaladhungi hospital, begging him to 
attend to Narwa immediately, and do all he could for him. She 
gave the note to our head boy and sent him to the hospital with 
the two men. 

I was out bird shooting that day with a party of friends who 
were spending their Christmas holiday at Kaladhungi, and 
when I returned in the late evening Maggie told me about 
Narwa. Early next morning I was at the hospital, where I was 
informed by a very young and very inexperienced doctor that 
he had done all he could for Narwa, but as he had little hope of 



his recovery, and no arrangements for in-patients, he had sent 
Narwa home after treating him. 

In the large communal hut, which housed about twenty 
families, each of which appeared to have a record number of 
small children, I found Narwa lying in a corner on a bed of 
straw and leaves. It was the last place for a man in his terrible 
condition to be in, for his wounds were showing signs of 
getting septic. For a week Narwa lay in the corner of the noisy 
and insanitary hut, at times raving in high fever, at times in a 
state of coma, watched over by his weeping wife, and his 
devoted 'brother' Haria, and by other friends. It was now 
apparent, even to my inexperienced eyes, that if Narwa's septic 
wounds were not opened up, drained, and cleaned, there was a 
certainty of the doctor's predictions being fulfilled, so, after 
making arrangements for his care while under treatment, I 
removed him to the hospital. To give the young doctor credit, 
when he undertook to do job he did it thoroughly, and many of 
the long scars on his chest and back that Narwa will carry to 
the burning-ghat were made not by the tiger but by the 
doctor's lancet, which he used very freely. 

With the exception of professional beggars, the poor in India 
can only eat when they work, and as Narwa's wife's days were 
fully occupied in visiting him at the hospital, and later in 
nursing him when he returned to the communal hut, and in 
caring for her three-year-old girl and her young baby, Maggie 
supplied all Narwa's wants, and the wants of his family (Small 
hospitals in India do not provide either attendants or food for 
patients.). Three months later, reduced to skin and bone and 
with a right arm that looked as though it could never be used 
again, Narwa crawled from the hut to our cottage to bid us 
goodbye and the next day he and Haria and their families set 
out for their village near Almora. 

After visiting Narwa in the communal hut that first morning, 
and getting a firsthand account of the incident from Haria, I 
was convinced that the tiger's encounter with Narwa was 



accidental. However, to satisfy myself that my reconstruction of 
the event was right— and to shoot the tiger if I was wrong— I 
followed, foot by foot, the track the brothers had taken the 
previous day when on their way to Nalni village. For a few 
yards the track runs along the edge of the strip of high grass at 
the foot of the Nalni hill, before turning at right angles to cross 
the grass. Shortly before the two men arrived at this spot, the 
tiger had killed a sambhar stag and carried it into the grass 
close to the right-hand side of the track. When Haria entered 
the grass the tiger heard the rustling, and coming out, ran into 
Narwa, who was a few yards behind Haria and a yard or two 
from the turning. The encounter was accidental, for the grass 
was too thick and too high for the tiger to have seen Narwa 
before he bumped into him. Furthermore it had made no 
attempt to savage Narwa, and had even allowed Haria to drag 
the man on whom it was lying away from under it. So the tiger 
was allowed to live, and was later induced to join the party of 
tigers that are mentioned in the chapter 'Just Tigers' in Man- 
eaters of Kumaon. 

Of all the brave deeds that I have witnessed, or that I have read 
or heard about, I count Haria's rescue of Narwa the greatest. 
Unarmed and alone in a great expanse of jungle, to respond to 
the cry of a companion in distress and to pull that companion 
away from an angry tiger that was lying on him, and then to 
drag and carry that companion for two miles up a steep hill to a 
place of safety, not knowing but that the tiger was following, 
needed a degree of courage that is given to few, and that any 
man could envy. When I took down Haria's statement— which 
was later corroborated in every detail by Narwa— with the 
object, unknown to him, of his act receiving recognition, so far 
from thinking that he had done anything deserving of 
commendation, after I had finished questioning him he said: 'I 
have not done anything. Sahib, have I, that is likely to bring 
trouble on me or on my brother Narwa?' 

And Narwa, a few days later, when I took down what I feared 
would be his dying declaration, said in avoice racked with pain 



and little above a whisper, 'Don't let my brother get into any 
trouble. Sahib, for it was not his fault that the tiger attacked 
me, and he risked his life to save mine'. I should have liked to 
have been able to end my story by telling you that Haria's 
brave act, and Narwa'sheroic fight for life against great odds, 
had been acknowledged by a certificate of merit, or some other 
small token of award, for both were poor men. Unfortunately 
red tape proved too much for me, for the Government was not 
willing to make any award in a case of which the truth could 
not be sworn to by independent and unbiased witnesses. 

So one of the bravest deeds ever performed has gone 
unrecognized because there were no 'independent and 
unbiased witnesses'; and of the brothers Haria is the poorer of 
the two, for he has nothing to show for the part he played, 
while Narwa has his scars and the sheet with many holes, 
stained with his blood. 

For many days I toyed with the idea of appealing to His Majesty 
the King, but with a world war starting and all it implied I very 
reluctantly abandoned the idea. 



VII - Sultana: India's Robin Hood 

IN a country as vast as India, with its great areas of forest land 
and bad communications, and with its teeming population 
chronically on the verge of starvation, it is easy to understand 
the temptations to embark on a life of crime, and the difficulty 
the Government have in rounding up criminals. In addition to 
the ordinary criminals to be found in all countries, there are in 
India whole tribes classed as criminals who are segregated in 
settlements set apart for them by the Government and 
subjected to a greater or lesser degree of restraint according to 
the crimes they specialize in. While I was engaged on welfare 
work during a part of the last war, I frequently visited one of 
these criminal settlements. The inmates were not kept under 
close restraint, and I had many interesting talks with them and 
with the Government representative in charge of the 
settlement. In an effort to wean this tribe from a life of crime 
the Government had given them, free of rent, a large tract of 
alluvial land on the left bank of the Jumna river in the Meerut 
District. This rich land produced bumper crops of sugarcane, 
wheat, barley, rape seed, and other cereals, but crime 
persisted. The Government representative blamed the girls, 
who, he said, refused to marry any but successful criminals. 

The tribe specialized in robbery, and there were old men in the 
settlement who trained the younger generation on a profit- 
sharing basis. 

Men were allowed to leave the settlement on ticket of leave for 
stated periods, but women were not permitted to leave. The 
elders of the tribe strictly enforced three rules: first, that all 
robberies were to be carried out single-handed ; second, that 
the scene of the crime was to be as distant from the settlement 
as possible; and third, that violence while committing the crime 
was not to be resorted to in any circumstances. 

The method invariably adopted by a young man, after he had 
completed his training, was to secure employment as a house 
servant with a rich man in Calcutta, Bombay, or some other 



distant city, and when opportunity offered to rob his master of 
articles which could be easily secreted, such as gold, jewellery, 
or precious stones. On one occasion while I was paying a 
number of young men who had been driving black partridge 
out of a sugarcane field for me, the Government representative 
informed me that the young man into whose hands I had just 
dropped his wage of eight annas, plus two annas for a runner 
he had retrieved, had returned to the settlement a few days 
previously, after an absence of a year, with a diamond worth 
thirty thousand rupees. 

After valuation by the experts of the tribe the diamond had 
been hidden, and the most sought-after girl in the settlement 
had promised to marry the successful criminal during the next 
marriage season. Another of the men standing near by, who 
had not taken part in the partridge drive, had conceived the 
novel plan of impressing the girl of his choice by driving up to 
the settlement, along a most appalling cart-track, in a new 
motor-car he had stolen in Calcutta. In order to carry out his 
plan he had first had to pay for driving lessons. Some members 
of criminal tribes who are not subjected to strict control find 
employment as night watch men in private houses, and I know 
of instances where it was a sufficient guarantee against theft 
for the watchman to place a pair of his shoes on the door step 
of the house in which he was employed. This may savour of 
blackmail, but it was cheap blackmail, for the wages paid 
varied from three to five rupees a month, according to the 
standing of the criminal, and the money was easily earned as 
all the watchman had to do was to place his shoes in position at 
night, and remove them again the next morning. Owing to their 
preference for violent crime the Bhantus were one of the 
criminal tribes in the United Provinces that were kept under 
strict restraint, and Sultana, the famous dacoit who for three 
years defied all the Government's efforts to capture him, was a 
member of this tribe. It is about Sultana that this story is 
written. 


When I first knew it, Naya Gaon was one of the most 



nourishing villages in the Terai and Bhabar— the tract of land 
running along the foothills of the Himalayas. Every yard of the 
rich soil, carved out of virgin forest, was under intensive 
cultivation, and the hundred or more tenants were prosperous, 
contented, and happy Sir Henry Ramsay, the King of Kumaon, 
had brought these hardy people down from the Himalayas, and 
for a generation they retained their vigour and flourished 
exceedingly 

Malaria at that time was known as 'Bhabar fever', and the few 
doctors, scattered over a wide area, who were responsible for 
the health of the people, had neither the ability nor the means 
to cope with this scourge of the foothills. Naya Gaon, situated 
in the heart of the forest, was one of the first villages in the 
Bhabar to be decimated by the disease. Field after field went 
out of cultivation as the tenants died, until only a handful of the 
sturdy pioneers were left, and when these survivors were given 
land in our village Naya Gaon reverted to jungle. 

Only once in later years was an attempt made to recultivate the 
land, the intrepid pioneer on this occasion being a doctor from 
the Punjab; but when first his daughter, then his wife, and 
finally he himself died of malaria, Naya Gaon for the second 
time went back to the jungle. 

On the land which had been cleared with great labour, on 
which bumper crops of sugarcane, wheat, mustard, and rice 
had been grown, luxuriant grass sprang up. Attracted by this 
rich feed, the cattle from our village three miles away adopted 
the deserted fields of Naya Gaon as their regular feeding 
ground. When cattle graze for long periods over open ground 
surrounded by jungle they invariably attract carnivora, and I 
was not surprised to hear one year, on our descent from our 
summer home in Naini Tal to our winter home in Kaladhungi, 
that a leopard had taken up residence in the jungles adjoining 
the grazing-ground and that he was taking heavy toll of our 
cattle. There were no trees on the grassland in which I could sit 
over a kill, so I determined to shoot the leopard either in the 



early morning, when he was on his way to lie up in thick cover 
for the day or in the evening, when he was returning to a kill 
or intent on making a fresh one. For either of these plans to be 
effective it was necessary to discover in what part of the 
surrounding jungles the leopard had made his home, so early 
one morning Robin and I set out to glean this information. 

Naya Gaon— for though the land has been out of cultivation for 
many years it retains its name to this day— is bounded on the 
north by the road known as the Kandi Sarak, and on the east by 
the old Trunk Road which before the advent of railways 
connected the plains of the United Provinces with the interior 
of Kumaon. 

To the south and west, Naya Gaon is bounded by dense jungle. 
Both the Kandi Sarak and the Trunk Road are little used in 
these days and I decided to try them first before trying the 
more difficult ground to the south and west. At the junction of 
the roads, where in the days gone by a police guard was posted 
for the protection of wayfarers against dacoits, Robin and I 
found the tracks of a female leopard. This leopard was well 
known to Robin and me, for she had lived for several years in a 
heavy patch of Iantana at the lower end of our village. Apart 
from never molesting our cattle, she had kept pigs and 
monkeys from damaging our crops, so we ignored her tracks 
and carried on along the Trunk Road in the direction of 
Garuppu. There had been no traffic on the road since the 
previous evening, and the tracks of animals who had used or 
crossed it were registered on the dusty surface. 

From the rifle in my hands Robin, who was a wise dog and my 
constant companion, knew we were not after birds so he paid 
no attention to the pea fowl that occasionally scurried across 
the road or to the jungle fowl that were scratching up the dead 
leaves at the side of it, but concentrated on the tracks of a 
tigress and her two half-grown cubs that had gone down the 
road an hour ahead of us. In places the wide road was 
overgrown with short dub grass. On this dew-drenched grass 



the cubs had rolled and tumbled, and Robin filled his nostrils to 
his heart's content with the sweet and terrifying smell of tiger. 
The family had kept to the road for a mile and had then gone 
east along a game track. Three miles from the junction, and 
two miles above Garuppu, a well-used game track coming from 
the direction of Naya Gaon crosses the road diagonally, and on 
this track we saw the fresh pug marks of a big male leopard. 

We had found what we were looking for. This leopard had come 
from the grazing ground and crossed the road. It was capable 
of killing a full-grown cow and there were not likely to be two 
leopards of this size in the same area. Robin was keen on 
following up the tracks, but the dense scrub jungle the leopard 
was making for— the same jungle in which Kunwar Singh and 
Har Singh had nearly lost their lives some years previously— 
was not suitable for stalking an animal with the sight and 
hearing of a leopard. Moreover, I had a better and simpler plan 
of making contact with the leopard, so we turned about and 
made for home and breakfast. 

After lunch Robin and I, accompanied by Maggie, retraced our 
steps down the Garuppu road. The leopard had not killed any of 
our cattle the previous day but he might have killed a chital or 
a pig which shared the grazing ground with the cattle; and 
even if he had no kill to return to there was a very good chance 
of his visiting his regular hunting ground. So Maggie and I, 
with Robin lying between us, took up position behind a bush on 
the side of the road, a hundred yards from the game track 
along which the leopard had gone that morning. We had been 
in position about an hour, listening to the multitude of bird 
calls, when a peacock in full plumage majestically crossed the 
road and went down the game path. A little later, ten or a 
dozen chital, in the direction of the heavy jungle in which we 
expected the leopard to be lying up, warned the jungle folk of 
the presence of a leopard. Ten minutes thereafter, and a little 
nearer to us, a single chital repeated the warning. The leopard 
was on the move and coming in our direction, and as he was 
making no attempt to conceal himself he was probably on his 



way to a kill. Robin had lain with chin on outstretched paws 
without movement, listening as we were to what the jungle folk 
had to say and when he saw me draw up my leg and rest the 
rifle on my knee, his body, which was against my left leg, 
started to tremble. The spotted killer, whom he feared more 
than any other beast in the jungle would presently put its head 
out of the bushes and, after looking up and down the road, 
would come towards us. Whether it died in its tracks, or roared 
and tumbled about with a mortal wound, he would remain 
perfectly still and silent, for he was taking part in a game with 
every move of which he was familiar, and which was as 
fascinating as it was terrifying. 

After going a short distance down the game path the peacock 
had climbed into the branches of a plum tree and was busily 
engaged in eating ripe fruit. Suddenly it sprang into the air 
with a harsh scream and alighted on the limb of a dead tree, 
adding its warning to that already given by the chital. A few 
minutes now, five at the most, for the leopard would approach 
the road very cautiously, and then out of the corner of my eye I 
caught sight of a movement far down the road. It was a man 
running, and every now and then, without slackening his pace, 
he looked over his shoulder behind him. To see a man on that 
road at this hour of the evening— the sun was near setting— 
was very unusual, and to see him alone was even more 
unusual. Every stride the man took lessened our chances of 
bagging the leopard. However, that could not be helped, for the 
runner was evidently in great distress, and possibly in need of 
help. I recognized him while he was still some distance from 
us; he was a tenant in a village adjoining ours who during the 
winter months was engaged as herdsman at a cattle station 
three miles east of Garuppu. 

On catching sight of us the runner started violently, but when 
he recognized me he came towards us and in a very agitated 
voice said, 'Run, Sahib, run for your life! Sultana's men are 
after me.' 



He was winded and in great distress. Taking no notice of my 
invitation to sit down and rest, he turned his leg and said, 'See 
what they have done to me! If they catch me they will surely 
kill me and you also, if you do not run.' The leg he turned for 
our inspection was slashed from the back of the knee to the 
heel, and dust-clotted blood was flowing from the ugly wound. 
Telling the man that if he would not rest there was at least no 
need for him to run any more, I moved out of the bushes to 
where I could get a clear view down the road, while the man 
limped off in the direction of his village. Neither the leopard 
nor Sultana's men showed up, and when there was no longer 
light for accurate shooting, Maggie and I, with a very disgusted 
Robin at our heels, returned to our home at Kaladhungi. 

Next morning I got the man's story. He was grazing his 
buffaloes between Garuppu and the cattle station when he 
heard a gunshot. The nephew of the headman of his village had 
arrived at the cattle station at dawn that morning with the 
object of poaching a chital, and while he had been sitting in the 
shade of a tree, speculating as to whether the shot had been 
effective or not and, if effective, whether a portion of the 
venison would be left at the cattle station for his evening meal, 
he heard a rustle behind him. Looking round, he saw five men 
standing over him. He was told to get up and take the party to 
where the gun had been fired. When he said he had been 
asleep and had not heard the shot he was ordered to lead the 
way to the cattle station, to which they thought the gunman 
would probably go. The party had no firearms, but the man who 
appeared to be their leader had a naked sword in his hand and 
said he would cut the herdsman's head off with it if he 
attempted to run away or shout a warning. 

As they made their way through the jungle the swordsman 
informed the herdsman that they were members of Sultana's 
gang and that Sultana was camped near by. When he heard the 
shot Sultana had ordered them to bring him the gun. Therefore 
if they met with any opposition at the cattle station they would 
burn it down and kill their guide. This threat presented my 



friend with a dilemma. His companions at the cattle station 
were a tough lot, and if they offered resistance he would 
undoubtedly be killed; on the other hand, if they did not resist, 
his crime in leading the dread Sultana's men to the station 
would never be forgotten or forgiven. While these unpleasant 
thoughts were running through his head a chital stag pursued 
by a pack of wild dogs came dashing through the jungle and 
passed within a few yards of them. Seeing that his escort had 
stopped and were watching the chase the herdsman dived into 
the high grass on the side of the path and, despite the wound 
he received on his leg as the swordsman tried to cut him down, 
he had managed to shake his pursuers off and gain the Trunk 
Road, where in due course he ran into us while we were 
waiting for the leopard. 

Sultana was a member of the Bhantu criminal tribe. With the 
rights and wrongs of classing a tribe as' criminal' and confining 
it within the four walls of the Najibabad Fort I am not 
concerned. It suffices to say that Sultana, with his young wife 
and infant son and some hundreds of other Bhantus, was 
confined in the fort under the charge of the Salvation Army. 
Chafing at his confinement, he scaled the mud walls of the fort 
one night and escaped, as any young and high-spirited man 
would have done. This escape had been effected a year 
previous to the opening of my story and during that year 
Sultana had collected a hundred kindred spirits, all armed with 
guns, around him. This imposing gang, whose declared object 
was dacoity, led a roving life in the jungles of the Terai and 
Bhabar, their activities extending from Gonda in the east to 
Saharanpur in the west, a distance of several hundred miles, 
with occasional raids into the adjoining province of the Punjab. 

There are many fat files in Government offices on the activities 
of Sultana and his gang of dacoits. I have not had access to 
these files, and if my story, which only deals with events in 
which I took part or events which came to my personal notice, 
differs or conflicts in any respects with Government reports I 
can only express my regret. At the same time I do not retract 



one word of my story. I first heard of Sultana when he was 
camping in the Garuppu jungles a few miles from our winter 
home at Kaladhungi. Percy Wyndham was at that time 
Commissioner of Kumaon, and as the Terai and Bhabar forests 
in which Sultana had apparently established himself were in 
Wyndham's charge he asked Government for the services of 
Freddy Young, a keen young police officer with a few years' 
service in the United Provinces to his credit. The Government 
granted Wyndham's request, and sanctioned the creation of a 
Special Dacoity Police Force of three hundred picked men. 
Freddy was put in supreme command of this force and given a 
free hand in the selection of his men. He earned a lot of 
unpopularity by building up his force with the best men from 
adjoining districts, for Sultana was a coveted prize and their 
own officers resented having to surrender men who might have 
helped them to acquire the prize. 

While Freddy was mustering his force. Sultana was getting his 
hand in by raiding small townships in the Terai and Bhabar. 
Freddy's first attempt to capture Sultana was made in the 
forests west of Ramnagar. The Forest Department were felling 
a portion of these forests, employing a large labour force, and 
one of the contractors in charge of the labour was induced to 
invite Sultana, who was known to be camping in the vicinity, to 
a dance to be followed by a feast. Sultana and his merry men 
accepted the invitation, but just before the festivities began 
they prevailed on their host to make a slight alteration in the 
programme and have the feast first and the dance later. 

Sultana said his men would enjoy the dance more on full 
stomachs than on empty ones. Here it is necessary to interrupt 
my story to explain for the benefit of those who have never 
been in the East that guests at a dance, or a 'nautch' as it is 
called here, do not take any part in the proceedings. The 
dancing is confined to a troop of professional dancing-girls and 
their male orchestra. Funds in plenty were available on both 
sides and, as money goes as far in the East towards buying 
information as it does in the West, one of the first moves of the 



two contestants in the game that was to be played was the 
organization of efficient secret services. Here Sultana had the 
advantage, for whereas Freddy could only reward for services 
rendered. Sultana could not only reward but could also punish 
for information withheld, or for information about his 
movements to the police, and when his method of dealing with 
offenders became known none were willing to court his 
displeasure. 

Having known what it was to be poor, really poor, during his 
long years of confinement in the Najibabad Fort, Sultana had a 
warm corner in his heart for all poor people. It was said of him 
that, throughout his career as a dacoit, he never robbed a pice 
from a poor man, never refused an appeal for charity, and paid 
twice the price asked for all he purchased from small 
shopkeepers. Little wonder then that his intelligence staff 
numbered hundreds and that he knew the invitation he had 
received to the dance and feast had been issued at Freddy's 
instigation. 

Meanwhile plans were on foot for the great night. The 
contractor, reputed to be a rich man, extended invitations to his 
friends in Ramnagar and in Kashipur; the best dancing-girls 
and their orchestras were engaged, and large guantities of 
eatables and drink— the latter specially for the benefit of the 
dacoits— were purchased and transported by bullock cart to 
the camp. 

At the appointed time on the night that was to see the undoing 
of Sultana, the contractor's guests assembled and the feast 
began. It is possible that the contractor's friends did not show 
who their fellow guests were, for on these occasions the 
different castes sit in groups by themselves and the 
illumination provided by firelight and a few lanterns was of the 
poorest. Sultana and his men ate and drank wisely and well, 
and when the feast was nearing its end the dacoit leader led 
his host aside, thanked him for his hospitality, and said that as 
he and his men had a long away to go he regretted they could 



not stay for the dance. Before leaving, however, he requested— 
and Sultana's requests were never disregarded— that the 
festivities should continue as had been arranged. 

The principal instrument of music at a nautch is a drum, and 
the sound of the drums was to be Freddy's signal to leave the 
position he had taken up and deploy his force to surround the 
camp. One section of this force was led by a forest guard, and 
the night being dark the forest guard lost his way. This section, 
which was to have blocked Sultana's line of retreat, remained 
lost for the remainder of the night. As a matter of fact the 
forest guard, who had to live in the forest with Sultana and was 
a wise man, need not have given himself the trouble of getting 
lost, for by his request for a slight alteration in the programme 
Sultana had given himself ample time to get clear of the net 
before the signal was given. So all that the attacking force 
found when they arrived at the camp, after a long and a 
difficult march through dense forest, was a troop of frightened 
girls, their even more frightened orchestra, and the mystified 
friends of the contractor. After his escape from the Ramnagar 
forests Sultana paid a visit to the Punjab. Here, with no forests 
in which to shelter, he was out of his element and after a brief 
stay, which yielded a hundred thousand rupees' worth of gold 
ornaments, he returned to the dense jungles of the United 
Provinces. On his way back from the Punjab he had to cross the 
Ganges canal, the bridges over which are spaced at intervals of 
four miles, and as his movements were known, the bridges he 
was likely to cross were heavily guarded. Avoiding these. 
Sultana made for a bridge which his intelligence staff informed 
him was not guarded, and on his way passed close to a large 
village in which a band was playing Indian music. On learning 
from his guides that a rich man's son was being married, he 
ordered them to take him to the village. 

The wedding party and some thousand guests were assembled 
on a wide open space in the centre of the village. As he entered 
the glare of the high-powered lamps Sultana's appearance 
caused a stir, but he requested the assembly to remain seated 



and added that if they complied with his request they had 
nothing to fear. He then summoned the headman of the village 
and the father of the bridegroom and made it known that, as 
this was a propitious time for the giving and receiving of gifts, 
he would like the headman's recently purchased gun for 
himself and ten thousand rupees in cash for his men. The gun 
and the money were produced in the shortest time possible, 
and having wished the assembly good night Sultana led his 
men out of the village. Not till the following day did he learn 
that his lieutenant, Pailwan, had abducted the bride. Sultana 
did not approve of women being molested by his gang, so 
Pailwan was severely reprimanded and the girl was sent back, 
with a suitable present to compensate her for the 
inconvenience to which she had been put. After the incident of 
the herdsman's slashed leg Sultana remained in our vicinity for 
some time. He moved camp frequently and I came upon several 
old sites while out shooting. It was at this time that I had a very 
exciting experience. 

One evening I shot a fine leopard on a fire-track five miles from 
home, and as there was not sufficient time to collect carriers to 
bring it in, I skinned it on the spot and carried the skin home; 
but on arrival I found that I had left my favourite hunting-knife 
behind. 

Early next morning I set out to retrieve the knife and as I 
approached the spot where I had left it I saw the glimmer of a 
fire through a forest glade, some distance from the track. 
Reports of Sultana's presence in this forest had been coming in 
for some days, and on the spur of the moment I decided to 
investigate the fire. Heavy dew on the dead leaves made it 
possible to move without sound, so taking what cover was 
available I stalked the fire, which was burning in a little hollow, 
and found some twenty to twenty-five men sitting round it. 
Stacked upright against a nearby tree, the fire glinting on their 
barrels, were a number of guns. Sultana was not present, for, 
though I had not seen him up to that time, he had been 
described to me as a young man, small and trim, who invariably 



dressed in semi-military khaki uniform. This was evidently part 
of his gang, however, and what was I going to do about it? The 
old head constable and his equally elderly force of two 
constables at Kaladhungi would be of little help, and Haldwani, 
where there was a big concentration of police, was fifteen miles 
away While I was considering my next move, I heard one oi the 
men say it was time to be going. Fearing that if I now tried to 
retreat I should be seen, and trouble might follow, 1 took a few 
rapid steps forward and got between the men and their guns. 

As I did so a ring of surprised faces looked up at me, for I was 
on slightly higher ground. When I asked them what they were 
doing here the men looked at each other, and the first to 
recover from his surprise said, 'Nothing'. In reply to further 
questions I was told that they were charcoal burners who had 
come from Bareilly and had lost their way. I then turned and 
looked towards the tree, and found that what I had taken to be 
gun barrels were stacked axes, the handles of which, polished 
by long and hard use, had reflected the firelight. Telling the 
men that my feet were wet and cold I joined their circle, and 
after we had smoked my cigarettes and talked of many things, I 
directed them to the charcoal-burners' camp they were looking 
for, recovered my knife, and returned home. 

In times of sustained excitement imagination is apt to play 
queer tricks. Sitting on the ground near a sambhar killed by a 
tiger I have heard the tiger coming and coming, and getting no 
nearer, and when the tension had become unbearable have 
turned round with finger on trigger to find a caterpillar biting 
minute bits out of a crisp leaf near my head. Again, when the 
light was fading and the time had come for the tiger to return 
to his kill, out of the corner of my eye I have seen a large 
animal appear; and as I was gripping my rifle and preparing for 
a shot an ant had crawled out on a dry twig a few inches from 
my face. With my thoughts on Sultana the glint of firelight on 
the polished axe-handles had converted them into gun barrels, 
and I never looked at them again until the men had convinced 
me they were charcoal burners. With his efficient organization 



and better means of transport, Freddy was beginning to exert 
pressure on Sultana, and to ease the strain the dacoit leader 
took his gang, by this time considerably reduced by desertion 
and capture, to Pilibhit on the eastern border of the district. 
Here he remained for a few months, raiding as far afield as 
Gorakhpur and building up his store of gold. 

On his return to the forests in our vicinity he learned that a 
very rich dancing-girl from the State of Rampur had recently 
taken up residence with the headman of Lamachour, a village 
seven miles from our home. Anticipating a raid, the headman 
provided himself with a guard of thirty of his tenants. The 
guard was not armed, and when Sultana arrived, before his 
men were able to surround the house the dancing-girl slipped 
through a back door and escaped into the night with all her 
jewellery. The headman and his tenants were rounded up in the 
courtyard, and when they denied all knowledge of the girl 
orders were given to tie them up and beat them to refresh their 
memories. To this order one of the tenants raised an objection. 
He said Sultana could do what he liked to him and his fellow 
tenants, but that he had no right to disgrace the headman by 
having him tied up and beaten. He was ordered to keep his 
mouth shut, but as one of the dacoits advanced towards the 
headman with a length of rope this intrepid man pulled a 
length of bamboo out of a lean-to and dashed at the dacoit. He 
was shot through the chest by one of the gang, but fearing the 
shot would arouse armed men in neighbouring villages Sultana 
beat a hasty retreat, taking with him a horse which the 
headman had recently purchased. I heard of the murder of the 
brave tenant next morning and sent one of my men to 
Lamachour to inquire what family the dead man had left, and I 
sent another man with an open letter to all the headmen of the 
surrounding villages to ask if they would join in raising a fund 
for the support of his family. The response to my appeal was as 
generous as I expected it to be, for the poor are always 
generous, but the fund was never raised, for the man who had 
given his life for his master came from Nepal twenty years 



previously, and neither his friends nor the inquiries I made in 
Nepal revealed that he had a wife or children. It was after the 
incident just related that I accepted Freddy's invitation to take 
a hand in rounding up Sultana, and a month later I joined him 
at his headquarters at Hardwar, During his eighteen years as 
Collector of Mirzapur Wyndham had employed ten Koles and 
ten Bhunyas from the tribes living in the Mirzapur forests to 
assist him in tiger shooting, and the four best of these men, 
who were old friends of mine, were now placed by Wyndham at 
Freddy's disposal and I found them waiting for me at Hardwar. 
Freddy's plan was for my four friends and myself to track down 
Sultana, and when we had done this, to lead his force to a 
convenient place from which to launch his attack. Both these 
operations, for reasons already given, were to be carried out at 
night. But Sultana was restless. Perhaps it was just 
nervousness or he may have had forewarning of Freddy's plans; 
anyway he never stayed for more than a day in anyone place, 
and he moved his force long distances at night. The weather 
was intensely hot and eventually, tired of inaction, the four men 
and I held a council of war the result of which was that after 
dinner that night, when Freddy was comfortably seated in a 
cool part of the veranda where there was no possibility of our 
being overheard, I put the following proposal before him. He 
was to let it be known that Wyndham had recalled his men for a 
tiger shoot, to which I had been invited, and was to have 
tickets to Haldwani purchased for us and see us off from the 
Hardwar station by the night train. At the first stop the train 
made, however, the four men, armed with guns provided by 
Freddy, and I with my own rifle were to leave the train. 
Thereafter we were to have a free hand to bring in Sultana, 
dead or alive, as opportunity offered. 

Freddy sat for a long time with his eyes closed after hearing my 
proposal— he weighed 20 stone 4 pounds and was apt to doze 
after dinner— but he was not asleep, for he suddenly sat up 
and in a very decided voice said, 'No. I am responsible for your 
lives, and I won't sanction this mad 'scheme'. Arguing with him 



was of no avail, so the next morning the four men and I left for 
our respective homes. 1 was wrong to have made the proposal 
and Freddy was right in turning it down. The four men and I 
had no official standing, and had trouble resulted from our 
attempt to capture Sultana our action could not have been 
justified. For the rest, neither Sultana's life nor ours was in any 
danger, for we had agreed that if Sultana could not be taken 
alive he would not be taken at all, and we were quite capable of 
looking after ourselves. Three months later, when the monsoon 
was in full blast, Freddy asked Herbert of the Forest 
Department, Fred Anderson, Superintendent of the Terai and 
Bhabar, and myself, to join him at Hardwar, On arrival we 
learnt that Freddy had located Sultana's permanent camp in 
the heart of the Najibabad jungles, and he wanted us to assist 
him in surrounding the camp, and to cut off Sultana's retreat if 
he slipped out of the ring. 

Herbert, a famous polo player, was to be put in command of the 
fifty mounted men who were to prevent Sultana's escape, while 
Anderson and I were to accompany Freddy and help him to 
form the ring. By this time Freddy had no illusions about the 
efficiency of Sultana's intelligence service, and with the 
exception of Freddy's two assistants, and the three of us no one 
knew of the contemplated raid. Each evening the police force, 
fully armed, were sent out on a long route march, while the 
four of us went out for an equally long walk, returning after 
dark to the Dam Bungalow in which we were staying. On the 
appointed night, instead of marching over the level crossing as 
they had been wont to do, the route marchers went through the 
Hardwar goods yard to a siding in which a rake of wagons, with 
engine and brake-van attached, was standing with doors open 
on the side away from the station buildings. The last of the 
doors was being shut as we arrived, and the moment we had 
climbed into the guard's van the train, without any warning 
whistles, started. Everything that could be done to allay 
suspicion had been done, even to the cooking of the men's food 
in their lines and to the laying of our table for dinner. We had 



started an hour after dark. At 9 p.m. the train drew up between 
two stations in the heart of the jungle and the order was passed 
from wagon to wagon for the force to detrain, and as soon as 
this order had been carried out the train steamed on. 

Of Freddy's force of three hundred men, the fifty to be Led by 
Herbert— who served in France in the First World War with the 
Indian cavalry— had been sent out the previous night with 
instructions to make a wide detour to where their mounts were 
waiting for them, while the main force of two hundred and fifty 
men with Freddy and Anderson in the lead, and myself bringing 
up the rear, set off for a destination which was said to be some 
twenty miles away. Heavy clouds had been banking up all day 
and when we left the train it was raining in torrents. 

Our direction was north for a mile, then east for two miles, 
again north for a mile, then west for two miles and finally again 
north. I knew the changes in direction were being made to 
avoid villages in which there were men in Sultana's pay, and 
the fact that not a village pye, the best watchdog in the world, 
barked at us testifies to the skill with which the manoeuvre was 
carried out. Hour after hour I plodded on, in drenching rain, in 
the wake of two hundred and fifty heavy men who had left pot 
holes in the soft ground into which I floundered up to my knees 
at every second step. For miles we went through elephant 
grass higher than my head, and balancing on the pitted and 
slippery ground became more difficult from the necessity of 
using one hand to shield my eyes from the stiff razor-edged 
grass. I had often marvelled at Freddy's 20 stone 4 pounds of 
energy, but never as I did that night. True, he was walking on 
comparatively firm ground while I was walking in a bog; yet 
even so he was carrying nine stone more than I, and the line 
moved on with never a halt. 

We had started at 9 p.m. At 2 a.m. I sent a verbal message up 
the line to ask Freddy if we were going in the right direction. I 
sent this message because for an hour we had left our original 
direction northwards, and had been going east. After a long 



interval word came back that the Captain Sahib said it was all 
right. After another two hours, through thick tree and scrub 
jungle or across patches of high grass, I sent a second message 
to Freddy asking him to halt the line as I was coming up to 
speak to him. Silence had been enjoined before starting, and as 
I made my way to the front I passed a very quiet and weary line 
of men, some of them sitting on the wet ground and others 
leaning against trees. I found Freddy and Anderson with their 
four guides at the head of the column. When Freddy asked if 
anything was wrong— this I knew referred to stragglers— I 
said all was well with the men but otherwise everything was 
wrong, for we were walking in circles. Having lived so much of 
my life in jungles in which it is very easy to get lost I have 
acquired a sense of direction which functions as well by night 
as it does by day. Our change of direction when we first started 
had been as evident to me as it had been two hours back when 
we changed direction from north to east. In addition, an hour 
previously I had noted that we passed under a simul tree with a 
vulture's nest in it, and when 1 sent my message to Freddy to 
halt the line I was again under the same tree. Of the four 
guides, two were Bhantus of Sultana's gang who had been 
captured a few days previously in the Hardwar bazaar, and on 
whose information the present raid had been organized. These 
two men had lived off and on for two years in Sultana's camp 
and had been promised their freedom for this night's work. The 
other two were cattle men who had grazed their cattle in these 
jungles all their lives, and who daily supplied Sultana with milk. 
All four men stoutly denied having lost their way, but on being 
pressed, they hesitated, and finally admitted that they would 
feel happier about the direction in which they were leading the 
force if they could see the hills. To see the hills, possibly thirty 
miles away, on a dark night with thick fog descending down to 
tree-top level, was impossible, so here was a check which 
threatened to ruin all Freddy's well-laid plans and, what was 
even worse, to give Sultana the laugh on us. Our intention had 
been a surprise attack on the camp, and in order to accomplish 
this it was necessary to get within striking distance while it 



was still dark. The guides had informed us that it was not 
possible to approach the camp in daylight from the side we had 
chosen without being seen by two guards who were constantly 
on watch from a machan in a high tree which overlooked a 
wide stretch of grass to the south of the camp. With our guides 
now freely admitting they had lost their way only another hour 
of darkness left and, worst of all, without knowing how far we 
were from the camp or in which direction it lay, our chance of a 
surprise attack was receding with every minute that passed. 
Then a way out of the dilemma occurred to me. I asked the four 
men if there was any feature, such as a stream or a well- 
defined cattle-track, in the direction in which we had originally 
started, by which they could regain direction, and when they 
replied that there was an old and well-defined cart-track a mile 
to the south of the camp, I obtained Freddy's permission to 
take the lead. I set off at a fast pace in a direction which all 
who were following me were, I am sure, convinced would lead 
back to the railway line we had left seven hours earlier. The 
rain had stopped, a fresh breeze had cleared the sky of clouds, 
and it was just getting light in the east when I stumbled into a 
deep cart-rut. Here was the disused track the guides had 
mentioned, and their joy on seeing it confirmed the opinion I 
had formed earlier, that losing themselves in the jungle had not 
been intentional. Taking over the lead again, the men led us 
along the track for a mile to where a well-used game-track 
crossed it. Half a mile up the game-track we came to a deep 
and sluggish stream some thirty feet wide which I was glad to 
see the track did not cross, for I am terrified of these Terai 
streams, on the banks and in the depths of which I have seen 
huge pythons lurking. The track skirted the right bank of the 
stream, through shoulder-high grass, and after going along it 
for a few hundred yards the men slowed down. From the way 
they kept looking to the left I concluded we were getting within 
sight of the machan, for it was now full daylight with the sun 
touching the tops of the trees. Presently the leading man 
crouched down, and when his companions had done the same, 
he beckoned us to approach. 



After signalling to the line to halt and sit down, Freddy, 
Anderson, and I crept up to the leading guide. Lying beside him 
and looking through the grass in the direction in which he was 
pointing we saw a machan built in the upper branches of a big 
tree, between thirty and forty feet above ground. On the 
machan, with the level sun shining on them, were two men, one 
sitting with his right shoulder towards us smoking a hookah, 
and the other lying on his back with his knees drawn up. The 
tree in which the machan was built was growing on the border 
of the tree and grass jungle and overlooked a wide expanse of 
open ground. Sultana's camp, the guides said, was three 
hundred yards inside the tree jungle. 

A few feet from where we were lying was a strip of short grass 
twenty yards wide, running from the stream on our right far 
out on to the open ground. To retreat a little, cross the stream, 
and recross it opposite Sultana's camp was the obvious thing to 
do, but the guides said this would not be possible; not only was 
the stream too deep to wade, but there was quicksand along 
the far bank. There remained the doubtful possibility of getting 
the whole force across the strip of short grass without being 
seen by the two guards, either of whom might at any moment 
look in our direction. Freddy had a service revolver, Anderson 
was unarmed, and I was the only one in the whole force who 
was carrying a rifle— the police were armed with 12-bore 
muskets using buckshot, with an effective range of from sixty 
to eighty yards. I was therefore the only one of the party who 
could deal with the two guards from our present position. The 
rifle shots would, of course, be heard in the camp, but the two 
Bhantus with us were of the opinion that when the guards did 
not return to the camp to report, men would be sent out to 
make inquiries. They thought that while this was being done it 
would be possible for us to encircle the camp. The two men on 
the machan were outlaws, and quite -possibly murderers to 
boot, and with the rifle in my hands I could have shot the 
hookah out of the smoker's hands and 'the heel off the other 
man's shoe without injury to either. But to shoot the men in 



cold, or in any other temperature of blood, was beyond my 
powers. So I made the following alternative suggestion: that 
Freddy give me permission to stalk the men— which would be 
guite easy, for the tall grass and tree jungle extended right up 
to the tree in which the machan was built and was soaking wet 
after the all-night rain— and occupy the machan with them 
while Freddy and his men carried on with their job. At first 
Freddy demurred, for there were two guns on the machan 
within easy reach of the men's hands, but eventually he 
consented and without further ado I slipped across the open 
ground and set off, for the Bhantus said the time was 
approaching for the guards to be changed. 

I had covered about a third of the way to the tree when I heard 
a noise behind and saw Anderson hurrying after me. What 
Anderson had said to Freddy, or Freddy had said to Anderson I 
do not know— both were my very good friends. Anyway, 
Anderson was determined to accompany me. He admitted he 
could not get through the jungle silently; that there was a good 
chance of the men on the machan hearing and seeing us; that 
we might run into the relief guard or find additional guards at 
the foot of the tree; that being unarmed he would not be able to 
defend himself, nevertheless and not withstanding, he was not 
going to let me go alone. When a man from across the Clyde 
digs his toes in he is more stubborn than a mule. 

In desperation I started to retrace my steps to solicit Freddy's 
help. But Freddy in the meantime had had time to regret his 
sanction (I learnt later the Bhantus had informed him the men 
on the machan were very good shots), and when he saw us 
returning he gave the signal for the line to advance. Fifty or 
more men had crossed the open strip of ground and we who 
were in advance were within two hundred yards of the camp 
when a zealous young constable, catching sight of the machan, 
fired off his musket. The two men on the machan were down 
the ladder in a flash. They mounted the horses that were 
tethered at the foot of the tree and raced for the camp. There 
was now no longer any necessity for silence and in a voice that 



did not need the aid of a megaphone, Freddy gave the order to 
charge. In a solid line we swept down on the camp, to find it 
deserted. The camp was on a little knoll and consisted of three 
tents and a grass hut used as a kitchen. One of the tents was a 
store and was stacked with sacks of atta, rice, dal, sugar, tins of 
ghee, two pyramids of boxes containing some thousands of 
rounds of 12-bore ammunition, and eleven guns in gun cases. 
The other two tents were sleeping places and were strewn with 
blankets and a medley of articles of clothing. Hanging from 
branches near the kitchen were three flayed goats. 

In the confusion following the arrival in camp of the two guards 
it was possible that some of the partly clothed gang had taken 
shelter in the high grass surrounding the camp, so orders were 
given to our men to make a long line, our intention being to 
beat a wide strip of jungle in the direction in which Herbert 
and his mounted men were on guard. While the line was being 
formed I made a cast round the knoll. Having found the tracks 
of ten or a dozen barefooted men in a nullah close to the camp, 

I suggested to Freddy that we should follow them and see 
where they led to. The nullah was fifteen feet wide and five feet 
deep, and Freddy, Anderson, and I had proceeded along it for 
about two hundred yards when we came on an outcrop of 
gravel, where 1 lost the tracks. Beyond the gravel the nullah 
opened out and on the left bank, near where we were standing, 
was a giant banyan tree with multiple stems. With its forest of 
stems, and branches sweeping down to the ground, this tree 
appeared to me to be an ideal place for anyone to hide in, so 
going to the bank, which at this point was as high as my chin, I 
attempted to climb up. There was no handhold on the bank and 
each time I kicked a hole in the soft earth the foothold gave 
way, and I wasjust contemplating going forward and getting on 
to the bank where the nullah Rattened out, when a fusillade of 
shots followed by shouting broke out in the direction of the 
camp. We dashed back the waywe had come and near the camp 
found a Havildar shot through the chest, and near him a dacoit, 
with a wisp of cloth round his loins, shot through both legs. The 



Havildar was sitting on the ground with his back to a tree; his 
shirt was open, and on the nipple of his left breast there was a 
spot of blood. Freddy produced a flask and put it to the 
Havildar's lips, but the man shook his head and put the flask 
aside, saying, 'It is wine. I cannot drink it'. When pressed he 
added, 'All my life I have been an abstainer, and I cannot go to 
my Creator with wine on my lips. I am thirsty and crave a little 
water'. His brother was standing near by. Someone gave him a 
hat and he dashed off to the stream that had hampered our 
movements, and returned in a few minutes with some dirty 
water which the wounded man drank eagerly. The wound had 
been made by a pellet of shot and when I could not feel it under 
the skin I said, 'Keep a strong heart, Havildar Sahib, and the 
doctor at Najibabad will make you well 1 . Smiling up at me he 
replied, 'I will keep a strong heart. Sahib; but no doctor can 
make me well 1 . 

The dacoit had no inhibitions about 'wine, 1 and in a few gulps 
he emptied the contents of the flask of which he was in great 
need, for he had been shot with a 12-bore musket at very short 
range. 

Two stretchers were improvised from material taken from 
Sultana's camp, and willing hands— for no distinction was 
made between the high-caste member of the police force and 
the low-caste dacoit— took them up. With spare runners 
running alongside, the stretchers set off through the jungle for 
the Najibabad hospital twelve miles away. The dacoit died of 
loss of blood and of shock on the way, and the Havildar died a 
few minutes after being admitted to the hospital. The beat was 
abandoned. Herbert did not come into the picture, for Sultana 
had been warned of the concentration of horse and none of the 
dacoits tried to cross the line he was guarding. So the sum 
total of our carefully planned raid, which had miscarried 
through no one's fault, was Sultana's entire camp less a few 
guns, and two dead men One a poor man, who, chafing at 
confinement, had sough liberty and adopted the only means of 
livelihood open to him and who would be mourned by a widow 



in the Najibabad fort. And the other a man respected by his 
superiors and loved by his men, whose widow would be cared 
for, and who had bravely died for a principle— for the 'wine' 
with which he refused to defile his lips would have sustained 
him until he had been laid on the operating table. 

Three days after the raid Freddy received a letter from the 
dacoit leader in which Sultana regretted that a shortage of 
arms and ammunition in the police force had necessitated a 
raid on his camp, and stating that if in future Freddy would let 
him know his requirements he. Sultana, would be very glad to 
supply him. 

The supply of arms and ammunition to Sultana was a very sore 
point with Freddy. Stringent orders on the subject had been 
issued, but it was not surprising that every licensed dealer and 
every licensed gun-holder in the area in which Sultana was 
operating was willing to risk the Government's displeasure 
when the alternative was the certainty of having his house 
raided, and the possibility of having his throat cut, if he refused 
Sultana's demands. So the offer of arms and ammunition was 
no idle one and it was the most unkind cut the dacoit leader 
could have delivered to the head of the Special Dacoity Police 
Force. 

With his hide-out gone, harried from end to end of the Terai 
and Bhabar, and with his gang reduced to forty— all well 
armed, for the dacoits had soon replaced the arms and 
ammunition taken from them— Freddy thought the time had 
now come for Sultana to surrender. So, after obtaining 
Government sanction— which was given on the understanding 
that he personally accepted full responsibility— he invited 
Sultana to a meeting, whenever and wherever convenient. 
Sultana accepted the invitation, named the time, date, and 
place, and stipulated that both should attend the meeting alone 
and unarmed. On the appointed day, as Freddy stepped out on 
one side of a wide open glade, in the centre of which a solitary 
tree was growing. Sultana stepped out on the other side. Their 



meeting was friendly, as all who have lived in the East would 
have expected it to be, and when they had seated themselves in 
the shade of the tree— one a mountain of energy and good 
humour with the authority of the Government behind him, and 
the other a dapper little man with a price on his head— Sultana 
produced a water melon which he smilingly said Freddy could 
partake of without reservation. The meeting ended in a 
deadlock, however, for Sultana refused to accept Freddy's 
terms of unconditional surrender. It was at this meeting that 
Sultana begged Freddy not to take undue risks. On the day of 
the raid, he said, he with ten of his men, all fully armed, had 
taken cover under a banyan tree and had watched Freddy and 
two other sahibs coming down the nullah towards the tree. 

'Had the sahib who was trying to climb the bank succeeded in 
doing so'. Sultana added, 'it would have been necessary to 
shoot the three of you.' 

The final round of the heavy-light-weight contest was now to be 
staged, and Freddy invited Wyndham and I myself to Hardwar 
to witness and take part in it. Sultana and the remnants of his 
gang, now weary of movement, had taken up residence at a 
cattle station in the heart of the Najibabad jungles, and 
Freddy's plan was to convey his entire force down the Ganges 
in boats, land at a convenient spot, and surround the cattle 
station. This raid, like the one already described, was to take 
place at night. But on this occasion the raid had been timed for 
the full moon. 

On the day chosen, the entire force of three hundred men, with 
the addition of Freddy's cousin, Wyndham, and myself, 
embarked as night was falling in ten country boats which had 
been assembled at a secluded spot on the right bank of the 
Ganges, a few miles below Hardwar. I was in the leading boat, 
and all went well until we crossed to the left bank and entered 
a side channel. The passage down this channel was one of the 
most terrifying experiences, off dry land, that I have ever had. 
For a few hundred yards the boat glided over a wide expanse of 
moonlit water without a ripple on its surface to distort the 



reflection of the trees on the margin. Gradually the channel 
narrowed and the speed of the boat increased, and at the same 
time we heard the distant sound of rushing water. I have often 
fished in these side channels of the Ganges, for they are 
preferred to the main stream by fish, and I marvelled at the 
courage of the boatmen who were willing to risk their lives and 
their craft in the rapids we were fast approaching. The boat, 
like the other nine, was an open cargo freighter eminently 
suitable for work on the open Ganges, but here in this narrow 
swift-flowing channel she was just an unmanageable hulk, 
which threatened to become a wreck every time her bottom 
planks came in violent contact with submerged boulders. The 
urgent call of the captain to his crew to fend the boat off the 
rocky banks and keep her in the middle of the stream, or she 
would founder, did nothing to allay my fears, for at the time the 
warning was given the boat was drifting sideways and 
threatening to break up or capsize every time she struck the 
bottom. But nightmares cannot last for ever. Though the one 
that night was long-drawn-out, for we had twenty miles to go, 
mostly through broken water, it ended when one of the 
boatmen sprang ashore on the left bank with one end of a long 
rope and made it fast to a tree. Boat after boat passed us and 
tied up lower down, until all ten had been accounted for. The 
force was disembarked on a sandy beach and when cuts and 
abrasions resulting from contact with the rough timbers of the 
boats had been attended to, and the boatmen had been 
instructed to take their craft five miles farther down stream 
and await orders, we set off in single file to battle our way 
through half a mile of the heaviest elephant grass I have ever 
tried to penetrate on foot. The grass was ten to twelve feet high 
and was weighted down with river fog and dew, and before we 
had gone a hundred yards we were wet to the skin. When we 
eventually arrived on the far side we were faced with a wide 
expanse of water which we took to be an old bed of the Ganges, 
and scouting parties were sent right and left to find the 
shortest way round the obstruction. The party that had gone to 
the right returned first and reported that a quarter of a mile 



from where we were standing the 'lake' narrowed, and that 
from this point to the junction of the channel down which we 
had come there was a swift-flowing river. Soon after the other 
party returned and reported that there was an unfordable river 
flowing into the upper end of the lake. It was now quite evident 
that our boatmen, intentionally or accidentally, had marooned 
us on an island. 

With our boats gone and daylight not far off it was necessary to 
do something, so we moved down to the lower end of the wide 
expanse of water to see if we could effect a crossing between it 
and the junction of the two channels. Where the water 
narrowed and the toe or draw of the stream started, there 
appeared to be a possible crossing; above this point the water 
was twenty feet deep, and below it was a raging torrent. While 
the rest of us were looking at the fast-flowing water and 
speculating as to whether anyone would be able to cross it, 
Wyndham was divesting himself of his clothes. When I 
remarked that this was an unnecessary proceeding in view of 
the fact that he was already wet to the skin, he replied that he 
was not thinking of his clothes, but of his life. When he had 
taken off every stitch of clothing he tied it into a bundle, using 
his shirt for the purpose, and placed the bundle firmly on his 
head, caught the arm of a strapping young constable standing 
near by and said, 'Come with me'. The young man was so taken 
aback at being selected to have the honour of drowning with 
the Commissioner Sahib that he said nothing, and together, 
with linked arms, the two stepped into the water. 

I do not think any of us breathed while we watched that 
crossing. With the water at times round their waists, and at 
times up to their armpits, it seemed impossible for them to 
avoid being carried off their feet and swept into the raging 
torrent below where no man, no matter how good a swimmer 
he was, could have lived. Steadily the two brave men, one the 
oldest in the party and the other possibly the youngest, fought 
their way on and when at last they struggled out on the far 
bank a sigh of relief went up from the spectators, which would 



have been a cheer audible in Hardwar, twenty miles away had 
silence not been imposed on us. 

Where two men could go three hundred could follow, so a chain 
was made; and though individual links were at times swept off 
their feet, the chain held, and the whole force landed safely on 
the far side. Here we were met by one of Freddy's most trusted 
informers who, pointing to the rising sun, said we had come too 
late; that it would not be possible for such a large force to 
cross the open ground between us and the forest without being 
seen by the herdsmen in the area, and that therefore the only 
thing for us to do was to go back to the island. So back to the 
island we went, the crossing from this side not being as bad as 
it had been from the other. 

Back in the elephant grass our first concern was to dry our 
clothes. This was soon accomplished, for the sun was by now 
hot, and when we were once again dry and warm Freddy, from 
his capacious haversack, produced a chicken and a loaf of 
bread which were no less welcome for having been immersed 
in the cold waters of the Ganges. I have the ability to sleep 
anywhere and at any time, and, having found a sandy hollow, 
most of the day had passed when I was awakened by violent 
sneezing. On joining my companions I found that all three of 
them were suffering from varying degrees of hay fever. The 
grass we were in was of the plumed variety and when we had 
passed through it in the early morning the plumes had been 
wet. But now, in the hot sun, the plumes had fluffed out and 
while moving about and trying to find cool places to rest in my 
companions had shaken the pollen down, with the result that 
they had given themselves hay fever. 

Indians do not get hay fever and I myself have never had it. 

This was the first time I had ever seen anyone suffering from it, 
and what I saw alarmed me. Freddy's cousin— a planter on 
holiday from Bengal— was the worst of the three; his eyes were 
streaming and swollen to the extent that he could not see, and 
his nose was running. Freddy could see a little but he could not 



stop sneezing, and when Freddy sneezed the earth shook. 
Wyndham, tough old campaigner that he was, while protesting 
that he was quite all right, was unable to keep his handkerchief 
away from his nose and eyes. It was bad enough being thrown 
about in an open boat, marooned on a desert island, and 
fording raging torrents; but here was the climax. To lead three 
men who threatened to go blind back to Hardwar at the head of 
the three hundred policemen was a prospect that made me feel 
colder than I had felt when crossing the ice-cold waters of the 
Ganges. As evening closed in the condition of the sufferers 
improved, much to my relief, and by the time we had crossed 
the ford for the third time Freddy and Wyndham were all right 
and the cousin had regained his sight to the extent that it was 
no longer necessary to tell him when to raise his foot to avoid a 
stone. Freddy's informer and a guide were waiting for us and 
led us over the open ground to the mouth of a dry watercourse 
about a hundred yards wide. The moon had just risen and 
visibility was nearly as good as in sunlight when, rounding a 
bend, we came face to face with an elephant We had heard 
there was a rogue elephant in this area, and here he was, tusks 
flashing in the moonlight, ears spread out, and emitting loud 
squeals. The guide did nothing to improve the situation by 
stating that the elephant was very bad tempered, that he had 
killed many people, and that he was sure to kill a number of us. 
At first it appeared that the rogue was going to make good the 
guide's predictions, for with trunk raised high he advanced a 
few yards. Then he swung round and dashed up the bank, 
trumpeting defiance as he gained the shelter of the jungle. 

Another mile up the watercourse and we came on what the 
guide said was a fire-track. Here the going was very pleasant, 
for with short green grass underfoot, and the moonlight 
glinting on every leaf and blade, it was possible to forget our 
errand and revel in the beauty of the jungle. As we approached 
a stretch of burnt grass where an old peacock, perched high on 
a leafless tree, was sending his warning cry into the night, two 
leopards stepped out on the track, saw us, and gracefully 



bounded away and faded out of sight in the shadows. I had 
been out of my element during the long passage down the side 
channel, but now, what with the elephant— who was, I knew, 
only curious and intended us no harm— and then the peacock 
warning the jungle folk of the presence of danger, and finally 
the leopards merging into the shadows, I was back on familiar 
ground, ground that I loved and understood. 

Leaving the track, which ran from east to west, the guide led 
us north for a mile or more through scrub and tree jungle to 
the bank of a tiny stream overhung by a giant banyan tree. 

Here we were told to sit down and wait, while the guide went 
forward to confer with his brother at the cattle station. A long 
and weary wait it was, which was in no way relieved by pangs 
of hunger, for we had eaten nothing since our meal off the 
chicken and loaf of bread, and it was now past midnight; and to 
make matters worse I, the only one who smoked, had 
exhausted my supply of cigarettes. The guide returned towards 
the early hours of the morning and reported that Sultana and 
the remnants of his gang, now reduced to nine, had left the 
cattle station the previous evening to raid a village in the 
direction of Hardwar and that they were expected back that 
night, or the following day. Before leaving to try to get us a 
little food, of which we were in urgent need, the guide and the 
informer warned us that we were in Sultana's territory and that 
it would be unwise for any of us to leave the shelter of the 
banyan tree. 

Another weary day passed, the last Wyndham could spend with 
us, for in addition to being Commissioner of Kumaon he was 
Political Agent of Tehri State and was due to meet the ruler at 
Narindra Nagar in two days time. After nightfall a cart loaded 
with grass arrived, and when the grass had been removed a 
few sacks of parched gram and forty pounds of gur were 
revealed. This scanty but welcome ration was distributed 
among the men. The guide had not forgotten the sahibs, and 
before driving away he handed Freddy a few chapattis tied up 
in a piece of cloth that had seen hard times and better days. As 



we lay on our backs with all topics of conversation exhausted, 
thinking of hot meals and soft beds in far-off Hardwar, I heard 
the welcome sounds of a leopard killing a chital a few hundred 
yards from our tree. Here was an opportunity of getting a 
square meal, for my portion of chapatti, far from allaying my 
hunger, had only added to it; so I jumped up and asked Freddy 
for his kukri. When he asked what on earth I wanted it for, I 
told him it was to cut off the hind legs of the chital the leopard 
had just killed. What leopard and what chital 1 , he asked, 'are 
you talking about?' Yes, he could hear the chital calling, but 
how was he to know that they were not alarmed by some of 
Sultana's men who were scouting round to spy on us? And 
anyway, if I was right in thinking a leopard had made a kill, 
which he doubted, how was I going to take the chital away 
from it when I could not use a musket (I had not brought my 
rifle with me on this occasion for I did not know to what use I 
might be asked to put it) so close to the cattle station? No, he 
concluded, the whole idea was absurd. So very regretfully I 
again lay down with my hunger. How could I convince anyone 
who did not know the jungle folk and their language that I 
knew the deer had not been alarmed by human beings; that 
they were watching one of their number being killed by a 
leopard; and that there was no danger in taking the kill, or as 
much of it as I wanted, away from the leopard? 

The night passed without further incident and at crack of dawn 
Wyndham and I set out on our long walk to Hardwar. We 
crossed the Ganges by the Bhimgoda Dam and after a quick 
meal at the Dam Bungalow had an evening's fishing on the 
wide expanse of water above the dam that will long be 
remembered. 

Next morning, just as Wyndham was leaving to keep-his 
appointment at Narindra Nagar, and I was collecting some 
eatables to take back to my hungry companions, word was 
brought to us by runner that Freddy had captured Sultana. 
Sultana had returned to the cattle station the previous evening. 
After his men had surrounded the station, Freddy crept up to 



the large hut used by the cattle men, and, seeing a sheeted 
figure asleep on the only charpoy the hut contained, sat down 
on it. Pinned down by 20 stone 4 pounds Sultana was not 
unable to offer any resistance, nor was he able to carry out his 
resolve of not being taken alive. Of the six dacoits in the hut at 
the time of the raid, four, including Sultana, were captured and 
the other two, Babu and Pailwan, Sultana's lieutenants, broke 
throught he police cordon and escaped, after being fired at. I 
do not know how many murders Sultana was responsible for, 
but when brought to trial the main charge against him was the 
murder, by one of his gang, of the tenant of the headman of 
Lamachour. While in the condemned cell Sultana sent for 
Freddy and bequeathed to him his wife and son in the 
Najibabad Fort, and his dog, of whom he was very fond. Freddy 
adopted the dog, and those who know Freddy will not need to 
be told that he faithfully carried out his promise to care for 
Sultana's family. 

Some months later Freddy, now promoted and the youngest 
man in the Indian Police service ever to be honoured by His 
Majesty the King with a C.I.E., was attending the annual Police 
Week at Moradabad. One of the functions at this week was a 
dinner to which all the police officers in the province were 
invited. During the dinner one of the waiters whispered to 
Freddy that his orderly wanted to speak to him. This orderly 
had been with Freddy during the years Freddy had been in 
pursuit of Sultana. Now, having an evening off, he had strolled 
down to the Moradabad railway station. While he was there, a 
train came in, and as he idly watched the passengers alighting 
two men came out of a, compartment near him. One of these 
men spoke to the other, who hastily put a handkerchief up to 
his face, but not before the orderly had seen that he had a 
piece of cotton wool sticking to his nose. The orderly kept his 
eye on the men, who had a considerable amount of luggage, 
and when they had made themselves comfortable in a corner of 
the waiting room he commandeered an ekka and hastened to 
inform Freddy. When Sultana's two lieutenants, Babu and 



Pailwan, broke through the cordon surrounding the cattle 
station, they had been fired at, and shortly thereafter a man 
had visited a small dispensary near Najibabad to have an injury 
to his nose, which he said had been caused by a dog bite, 
attended to. When reporting the case to the police, the 
compounder who dressed the wound said he suspected it had 
been caused by a pellet of buckshot. So the entire police force 
of the province were on the lookout for a man with an injured 
nose, all the more so because Babu and Pailwan were credited 
with having committed most of the murders for which Sultana's 
gang were responsible. When he heard the orderly's story 
Freddy jumped into his car and dashed to the station— dashed 
is the right word, for when Freddy is in a hurry the road is 
before him and traffic and corners do not exist. At the station 
he placed guards at all the exits to the waiting room and then 
went up to the two men and asked them who they were. 
Merchants, they answered, on their way from Bareilly to the 
Punjab. Why then, asked Freddy, had they taken a train that 
terminated at Moradabad? He was told that there had been two 
trains at the Bareilly platform and they had been directed to 
the wrong one. When Freddy learnt the men had not had any 
food, and that they would have to wait until next morning for a 
connecting train, he invited them to accompany him and be his 
guests. For a moment the men hesitated, and then said, 'As you 
wish. Sahib'. 

With the two men in the back of the car Freddy drove slowly, 
closely questioning them, and to all his questions he received 
prompt answers. The men then asked Freddy if it was 
customary for sahibs to visit railway stations at night and carry 
off passengers, leaving their luggage to be plundered by any 
who cared to do so. Freddy knew that his action, without a duly 
executed warrant, could be described as high-handed and 
might land him in serious trouble if the members of Sultana's 
gang serving sentences In the Moradabad jail failed to identify 
their late companions. While these unpleasant thoughts were 
chasing each other through his mind, the car arrived at the 



bungalow in which he was putting up for the Police Week. All 
dogs love Freddy; and Sultana's dog was no exception. In the 
months that had passed this pye with a dash of terrier blood 
had given Freddy all his affection, and now, when the car 
stopped and the three men got out, the dog came dashing out 
of the bungalow, stopped in surprise, and then hurled himself 
at the two travellers with every manifestation of delight that a 
dog can exhibit. For a tense minute Freddy and the two men 
looked at each other in silence and then Pailwan, who knew the 
fate that awaited him, stooped down and patting the dog's head 
said, 'In face of this honest witness what use is it. Young Sahib, 
for us to deny we are the men you think we are'. Society 
demands protection against criminals, and Sultana was a 
criminal. He was tried under the law of the land, found guilty, 
and executed. Nevertheless, I cannot withhold a great measure 
of admiration for the little man who set at nought the might of 
the Government for three long years, and who by his brave 
demeanour won the respect of those who guarded him in the 
condemned cell. 

I could have wished that justice had not demanded that Sultana 
be exhibited in manacles and leg-irons, and exposed to ridicule 
from those who trembled at the mere mention of his name 
while he was at liberty. I could also have wished that he had 
been given a more lenient sentence, for no other reasons than 
that he had been branded a criminal at birth, and had not had a 
fair chance; that when power was in his hands he had not 
oppressed the poor; that when I tracked him to the banyan tree 
he spared my life and the lives of my friends. And finally, that 
he went to his meeting with Freddy, not armed with a knife or a 
revolver, but with a water melon in his hands. 



VIII - Loyalty 

THE mail train was running at its maximum speed of thirty 
miles per hour through country that was familiar. For mile upon 
mile the newly risen sun had been shining on fields where 
people were reaping the golden wheat, for it was the month of 
April and the train was passing through the Gangetic valley the 
most fertile land in India. 

During the previous year India had witnessed one of her worst 
famines. I had seen whole villages existing on the bark of trees; 
on minute grass seeds swept up with infinite labour from 
scorching plains; and on the wild plums that grow on waste 
lands too poor for the raising of crops. Mercifully the weather 
had changed, good winter rains had brought back fertility to 
the land, and the people who had starved for a year were now 
eagerly reaping a good harvest. Early though the hour was, the 
scene was one of intense activity in which every individual of 
the community had his, or her, allotted part. The reaping was 
being done by women, most of them landless labourers who 
move from area to area, as the crop ripens, and who for their 
labour— which starts at dawn and ends when there is no longer 
light to work by— receive one-twelfth to one-sixteenth of the 
crop they cut in the course of the day. 

There were no hedges to obstruct the view, and from the 
carriage window no mechanical device of any kind was to be 
seen. The ploughing had been done by oxen, two to a plough; 
the reaping was being done by sickles with a curved blade 
eighteen inches long; the sheaves, tied with twisted stalks of 
wheat straw, were being carted to the threshing floor on 
oxcarts with wooden wheels; and on the threshing floor, 
plastered over with cow dung, oxen were treading out the corn; 
they were tied to a long rope, one end of which was made fast 
to a pole firmly fixed in the ground. As a field was cleared of 
the sheaves children drove cattle on to it to graze on the 
stubble and amongst the cattle old and infirm women were 
sweeping the ground to recover any seed that had fallen from 



the ears when the wheat was being cut. Half of what these 
toilers collected would be taken by the owner of the field and 
the other half— which might amount to as much as a pound or 
two, if the ground was not too sun cracked— they would be 
permitted to retain. 

My journey was to last for thirty-six hours. I had the carriage to 
myself, and the train would stop for breakfast, lunch, and 
dinner. Every mile of the country through which the train was 
running was interesting; and yet I was not happy, for in the 
steel trunk under my seat was a string bag containing two 
hundred rupees which did not belong to me. Eighteen months 
previously I had taken employment as a Fuel Inspector with the 
railway on which I was now travelling. I had gone straight from 
school to this job, and for those eighteen months I had lived in 
the forest cutting five hundred thousand cubic feet of timber, to 
be used as fuel in locomotives. After the trees had been felled 
and billeted, each billet not more and not less than thirty-six 
inches long, the fuel was carted ten miles to the nearest point 
of the railway, where it was stacked and measured and then 
loaded into fuel trains and taken to the stations where it was 
needed. Those eighteen months alone in the forest had been 
strenuous, but I had kept fit and enjoyed the work. There was 
plenty of game in the forest in the way of chital, four-horned 
antelope, pig, and pea fowl, and in the river that formed one 
boundary of the forest there were several varieties of fish and 
many alligators and python. My work did not permit of my 
indulging in sport during daylight hours so I had to do all my 
shooting for the pot, and fishing, at night. Shooting by 
moonlight is very different from shooting in daylight, for 
though it is easier to stalk a deer or a rooting pig at night it is 
difficult to shoot accurately unless the moon can be got to 
shine on the foresight. The pea fowl had to be shot while they 
were roosting, and I am not ashamed to say that I occasionally 
indulged in this form of murder, for the only meat I ate during 
that year and a half was what I shot on moonlight nights; 
during the dark period of the moon I had perforce to be a 



vegetarian. 

The felling of the forest disarranged the normal life of the 
jungle folk and left me with the care of many waifs and 
orphans, all of whom had to share my small tent with me. It 
was when I was a bit crowded with two broods of partridges— 
one black and the other grey four pea fowl chicks, two 
leverets, and two baby four-horned antelope that could only 
just stand upright on their spindle legs, that Rex the python 
took up his quarters in the tent. I returned an hour after 
nightfall that day, and while I was feeding the four-footed 
inmates with milk I saw the lantern light glinting on something 
in a corner of the tent and on investigation found Rex coiled up 
on the straw used as a bed by the baby antelope. A hurried 
count revealed that none of the young inmates of the tent were 
missing, so I left Rex in the corner he had selected. For two 
months thereafter Rex left the tent each day to bask in the sun, 
returning to his corner at sundown, and during the whole of 
that period he never harmed any of the young life he shared 
the tent with. Of all the waifs and orphans who were brought 
up in the tent, and who were returned to the forest as soon as 
they were able to fend for themselves, Tiddley-de-winks, a four¬ 
horned antelope, was the only one who refused to leave me. 

She followed me when I moved camp to be nearer to the 
railway line to supervise the loading of the fuel, and in doing so 
nearly lost her life. Having been brought up by hand she had no 
fear of human beings and the day after our move she 
approached a man who, thinking she was a wild animal, tried 
to kill her. When I returned to the tent that evening I found her 
lying near my camp bed and on picking her up saw that both 
her forelegs had been broken, and that the broken ends of the 
bones had worked through the skin. While I was getting a little 
milk down her throat, and trying to summon sufficient courage 
to do what I knew should be done, my servant came into the 
tent with a man who admitted to having tried to kill the poor 
beast. It appeared that this man had been working in his field 
when Tiddley-de-winks went up to him, and thinking she had 



strayed in from the nearby forest, he struck her with a stick 
and then chased her; and it was only when she entered my tent 
that he realized she was a tame animal. My servant had 
advised him to leave before I returned, but this the man had 
refused to do. When he had told his story he said he would 
return early next morning with a bone-setter from his village. 
There was nothing I could do for the injured animal, beyond 
making a soft bed for her and giving her milk at short intervals, 
and at day break next morning the man returned with the 
bone-setter. It is unwise in India to judge from appearances. 

The bone-setter was a feeble old man, exhibiting in his person 
and tattered dress every sign of poverty, but he was none the 
less a specialist, and a man of few words. He asked me to lift 
up the injured animal, stood looking at her for a few minutes, 
and then turned and left the tent, saying over his shoulder that 
he would be back in two hours. I had worked week in week out 
for months on end so I considered I was justified in taking a 
morning off, and before the old man returned I had cut a 
number of stakes in the nearby jungle and constructed a small 
pen in a corner of the tent. The man brought back with him a 
number of dry jute stalks from which the bark had been 
removed, a quantity of green paste, several 

young castor-oil plant leaves as big as plates, and a roll of thin 
jute twine. When I had seated myself on the edge of the camp 
bed with Tiddley-de-winks across my knees, her weight partly 
supported by her hind legs and partly by my knees, the old man 
sat down on the ground in front of her with his materials within 
reach. 

The bones of both forelegs had been splintered midway 
between the knees and the tiny hooves, and the dangling 
portion of the legs had twisted round and round. Very gently 
the old man untwisted the legs, covered them from knee to 
hoof with a thick layer of green paste, laid strips of the castor- 
oil leaves over the paste to keep it in position, and over the 
leaves laid the jute stalks, binding them to the legs with jute 
twine. Next morning he returned with splints made of jute 



stalks strung together, and when they had been fitted to her 
legs Tiddley-de-winks was able to bend her knees and place her 
hooves, which extended an inch beyond the splints, on the 
ground. 

The bone-setter's fee was one rupee, plus two annas for the 
ingredients he had put in the paste and the twine he had 
purchased in the bazaar and not until the splints had been 
removed and the little antelope was able to skip about again 
would he accept either his fee or the little present I gratefully 
offered him. 

My work, every day of which I had enjoyed, was over now and I 
was on my way to headquarters to render an account of the 
money I had spent and, I feared, to look for another job; for the 
locomotives had been converted to coal-burning and no more 
wood fuel would be needed. My books were all in perfect order 
and I had the feeling that I had rendered good service, for I had 
done in eighteen months what had been estimated to take two 
years. Yet I was uneasy, and the reason for my being so was the 
bag of money in my steel trunk. 

I reached my destination, Samastipur, at 9 a.m. and after 
depositing my luggage in the waiting-room set out for the office 
of the head of the department I had been working for, with my 
account books and the bag containing the two hundred rupees. 
At the office I was told by a very imposing doorkeeper that the 
master was engaged, and that I would have to wait. It was hot 
in the open veranda, and as the minutes dragged by my 
nervousness increased, for an old railway hand who had helped 
me to make up my book shad warned me that to submit 
balanced accounts and then admit, as I had every intention of 
doing, that I had two hundred rupees in excess would land me 
in very great trouble. Eventually the door opened and av ery 
harassed-looking man emerged; and before the doorkeeper 
could close it, a voice from inside the room bellowed at me to 
come in. 


Ryles, the head of the Locomotive Department of the Bengal 



and North Western Railway; was a man weighing sixteen stone, 
with a voice that struck terror into all who served under him, 
and with a heart of gold. Bidding me sit down he drew my 
books towards him, summoned a clerk and very carefully 
checked my figures with those received from the stations to 
which the fuel had been sent. Then he told me he regretted my 
services would no longer be needed, said that discharge orders 
would be sent to me later in the day, and indicated that the 
interview was over. Having picked my hat off the floor I started 
to leave, but was called back and told I had forgotten to remove 
what appeared to be a bag of money that I had placed on the 
table. It was foolish of me to have thought I could just leave the 
two hundred rupees and walk away, but that was what I was 
trying to do when Ryles called me; so I went back to the table 
and told him that the money belonged to the Railway, and as I 
did not know how to account for it in my books, I had brought it 
to him. 'Your books are balanced', Ryles said, 'and if you have 
not faked your accounts I should like an explanation.' 

Tewari, the head clerk, had come into the room with a tray of 
papers and he stood behind Ryles's chair, with encouragement 
in his kindly old eyes, as I gave Ryles the following explanation. 
When my work was nearing completion, fifteen cart-men, who 
had been engaged to cart fuel from the forest to the railway 
line, came to me one night and stated they had received an 
urgent summons to return to their village, to harvest the crops. 
The fuel they had carted was scattered over a wide area, and 
as it would take several days to stack and measure it they 
wanted me to make a rough calculation of the amount due to 
them, as it was essential for them to start on their journey that 
night. It was a dark night and quite impossible for me to 
calculate the cubic contents of the fuel, so I told them I would 
accept their figures. Two hours later they returned, and within 
a few minutes of paying them, I heard their carts creaking 
away into the night. They left no address with me, and several 
weeks later, when the fuel was stacked and measured, I found 
they had underestimated the amount due to them by two 



hundred rupees. When I had told my story Ryles informed me 
that the Agent, Izat, was expected in Samastipur next day and 
that he would leave him to deal with me. Izat, Agent of three of 
the most flourishing railways in India, arrived next morning 
and at midday I received a summons to attend Ryles's office. 
Izat, a small dapper man with piercing eyes, was alone in the 
office when I entered it, and after complimenting me on having 
finished my job six months ahead of time he said Ryles had 
shown him my books and given him a report and that he 
wanted to ask one question. Why had I not pocketed the two 
hundred rupees, and said nothing about it? My answer to this 
question was evidently satisfactory, for that evening, while 
waiting at the station in a state of uncertainty, I received two 
letters, one from Tewari thanking me for my contribution of 
two hundred rupees to the Railway men's Widows' and 
Orphans' Fund, of which he was Honorary Secretary, and the 
other from Izat informing me that my services were being 
retained, and instructing me to report to Ryles for duty. 

For a year there after I worked up and down the railway on a 
variety of jobs, at times on the footplates of locomotives 
reporting on consumption of coal— a job I liked for I was 
permitted to drive the engines; at times as guard of goods 
trains, a tedious job, for the railway was short-handed and on 
many occasions I was on duty for forty-eight hours at a stretch; 
and at times as assistant storekeeper, or assistant station- 
master. And then one day I received orders to go to Mokameh 
Ghat and see Storrar, the Ferry Superintendent. The Bengal 
and North Western Railway runs through the Gangetic valley at 
varying distances from the Ganges river, and at several places 
branch line stake off from the main line and run down to the 
river and, by means of ferries, connect up with the broad gauge 
railways on the right bank. Mokameh Ghat on the right bank of 
the Ganges is the most important of these connexions. 

I left Samastipur in the early hours of the morning and at the 
branch-line terminus, Samaria Ghat, boarded the S.S. 
Gorakhpur. Storrar had been apprised of my visit but no reason 



had been given, and as I had not been told why I was to go to 
Mokameh Ghat, we spent the day partly in his house and partly 
in walking about the extensive sheds, in which there appeared 
to be a considerable congestion of goods. Two days later I was 
summoned to Gorakhpur, the headquarters of the railway, and 
informed that I had been posted to Mokameh Ghat as Trans¬ 
shipment Inspector, that my pay had been increased from one 
hundred to one hundred and fifty rupees per month, and that I 
was to take over the contract for handling goods a week later. 

So back to Mokameh Ghat I went, arriving on this occasion at 
night, to take up a job about which I knew nothing, and to take 
on a contract without knowing where to get a single labourer, 
and, most important of all, with a capital of only one hundred 
and fifty rupees, saved during my two and a half years' service. 

Storrar was not expecting me on this occasion, but he gave me 
dinner, and when I told him why I had returned we took our 
chairs on to the veranda, where a cool wind was blowing off the 
river, and talked late into the night. Storrar was twice my age 
and had been at Mokameh Ghat for several years. He was 
employed as Ferry Superintendent by the Bengal and North 
Western (metre-gauge) Railway, and was in charge of a fleet of 
steamers and barges that ferried passengers and metre-gauge 
wagons between Samaria Ghat and Mokameh Ghat. I learnt 
from him that eighty per cent, of the longdistance traffic on the 
Bengal and North Western Railway passed through Mokameh 
Ghat; and that each year, from March to September, congestion 
of goods traffic took place at Mokameh Ghat and caused 
serious loss to the Railway. 

The transfer of goods between the two railways at Mokameh 
Ghat, necessitated by a break of gauge, was done by a Labour 
Company which held the contract for handling goods 
throughout the length of the broad-gauge railway. In Storrar's 
opinion the indifference of this company to the interests of the 
metre- gauge railway, and the seasonal shortage of labour due 
to the harvesting of crops in the Gangetic valley, were the 



causes of the annual congestion. Having imparted this 
information, he very pertinently asked how I, a total stranger to 
the locality and without any capital— he brushed aside my 
hard-earned savings— proposed to accomplish what the Labour 
Company with all their resources had failed to do. The sheds at 
Mokameh Ghat, he added, were stacked to the roof with goods; 
there were four hundred wagons in the yard waiting to be 
unloaded, and a thousand wagons on the far side of the river 
waiting to be ferried across. 'My advice to you', he concluded, 

'is to catch the early steamer to Samaria Ghat and to go 
straight back to Gorakhpur. Tell the Railway you will have 
nothing to do with the handling contract.' I was up early next 
morning but I did not catch the steamer to Samaria Ghat. 
Instead, I went on a tour of inspection of the sheds and of the 
goods yard. Storrar had not over painted the picture: in fact 
the conditions were even worse than he had said they were, for 
in addition to the four hundred metre-gauge wagons there 
were the same number of broad-gauge wagons waiting to be 
unloaded. At a rough calculation I put the goods at Mokameh 
Ghat waiting to be dealt with at fifteen thousand tons, and I 
had been sent to clear up the mess. Well, I was not quite 
twenty-one years of age, and summer was starting, a season 
when all of us are a little bit mad. By the time I met Ram Saran 
I had made up my mind that I would take on the job, no matter 
what the result might be. Ram Saran was station-master at 
Mokameh Ghat, a post he had held for two years. He was 
twenty years older than I was, had an enormous jet black 
beard, and was the father of five children. He had been advised 
by telegram of my arrival, but had not been told that I was to 
take over the handling contract. 

When I gave him this bit of news his face beamed all over and 
he said, 'Good, Sir. Very good. We will manage.' My heart 
warmed towards Ram Saran on hearing that 'we', and up to his 
death, thirty-five years later, it never cooled. When I told 
Storrar over breakfast that morning that I had decided to take 
on the handling contract he remarked that fools never took 



good advice, but added that he would do all he could to help 
me, a promise he faithfully kept. In the months that followed he 
kept his ferry running day and night to keep me supplied with 
wagons. 

The journey from Gorakhpur had taken two days, so when I 
arrived at Mokameh Ghat I had five days in which to learn what 
my duties were, and to make arrangements for taking over the 
handling contract. The first two days I spent in getting 
acquainted with my staff which, in addition to Ram Saran, 
consisted of an assistant station-master, a grand old man by the 
name of Chatterji who was old enough to be my grandfather, 
sixty-five clerks, and a hundred shunters, pointsmen, and 
watchmen. My duties extended across the river to Samaria 
Ghat where I had a clerical and menial staff a hundred strong. 
The supervising of these two staffs, and the care of the goods 
in transit, was in itself a terrifying job and added to it was the 
responsibility of providing a labour force sufficient to keep the 
five hundred thousand tons of goods that passed through 
Mokameh Ghat annually flowing smoothly. 

The men employed by the big Labour Company were on piece 
work, and as all work at Mokameh Ghat was practically at a 
stand still, there were several hundred very discontented men 
sitting about the sheds, many of whom offered me their 
services when they heard that I was going to do the handling 
for the metre-gauge railway. I was under no agreement not to 
employ the Labour Company's men, but thought it prudent not 
to do so. However, I saw no reason why I should not employ 
their relatives, so on the first of the three days I had in hand I 
selected twelve men and appointed them headmen. Eleven of 
these headmen undertook to provide ten men each, to start 
with, for the handling of goods, and the twelfth undertook to 
provide a mixed gang of sixty men and women for the handling 
of coal. The traffic to be dealt with consisted of a variety of 
commodities, and this meant employing different castes to deal 
with the different classes of goods. So of the twelve headmen, 
eight were Hindus, two Mohammedans, and two men of the 



depressed class; and as only one of the twelve was literate I 
employed one Hindu and one Mohammedan clerk to keep their 
accounts. While one Labour Company was doing the work of 
both railways the interchange of goods had taken place from 
wagon to wagon. Now each railway was to unload its goods in 
the sheds, and reload from shed to wagon. For all classes of 
goods, excluding heavy machinery and coal, I was to be paid at 
the rate of Re 1-7-0 (equivalent to is. lid. at the rate of 
exchange then current) for every thousand maunds of goods 
unloaded from wagons to shed or loaded from shed to wagons. 
Heavy machinery and coal were one-way traffic and as these 
two commodities were to be trans-shipped from wagon to 
wagon and only one contractor could be employed for the 
purpose, the work was entrusted to me, and I was to receive Re 
1-4- 0 (is. 8d.) for unloading, and the same for loading, one 
thousand maunds. There are eighty pounds in a maund, and a 
thousand maunds therefore are equal to over thirty-five tons. 
These rates will appear incredible, but their accuracy can be 
verified by a reference to the records of the two railways. 

A call-over on the last evening revealed that I had eleven 
headmen, each with a gang of ten men, and one headman with 
a mixed gang of sixty men and women. This, together with the 
two clerks, completed my force. At daybreak next morning I 
telegraphed to Gorakhpur that I had assumed my duties as 
Trans-shipment Inspector, and had taken over the handling 
contract. 

Ram Saran's opposite number on the broad-gauge railway was 
an Irishman by the name of Tom Kelly. Kelly had been at 
Mokameh Ghat for some years and though he was very 
pessimistic of my success, he very sportingly offered to help me 
in every way he could. With the sheds congested with goods, 
and with four hundred wagons of each railway waiting to be 
unloaded, it was necessary to do something drastic to make 
room in the sheds and get the traffic moving, so I arranged 
with Kelly that I would take the risk of unloading a thousand 
tons of wheat on the ground outside the sheds and with the 



wagons so released clear a space in the sheds for Kelly to 
unload a thousand tons of salt and sugar. Kelly then with his 
empty wagons would clear a space in the sheds for me. This 
plan worked admirably. Fortunately for me it did not rain while 
my thousand tons of wheat were exposed to the weather, and in 
ten days we had not only cleared the accumulation in the sheds 
but also the accumulation of wagons. Kelly and I were then 
able to advise our respective headquarters to resume the 
booking of goods via Mokameh Ghat, which had been 
suspended for a fortnight. I took over the contract at the 
beginning of the summer, the season when traffic on Indian 
railways is at its heaviest, and as soon as booking was opened a 
steady stream of downwards traffic from the Bengal and North 
Western Railway and an equally heavy stream from the broad- 
gauge railway started pouring into Mokameh Ghat. The rates 
on which I had been given the contract were the lowest paid to 
any contractor in India, and the only way in which I could hope 
to keep my labour was by cutting it down to the absolute 
minimum and making it work harder in order that it would earn 
as much, or possibly a little more, than other labour on similar 
work. All the labour at Mokameh Ghat was on piece work, and 
at the end of the first week my men and I were overjoyed to 
find that they had earned, on paper, fifty per cent, more than 
the Labour Company's men had earned. When entrusting me 
with the contract the Railway promised to pay me weekly, and I 
on my part promised to pay my labour weekly. The Railway, 
however, when making their promise, failed to realize that by 
switching over from one handling contractor to another they 
would be raising complications for their Audit Department that 
would take time to resolve. For the Railway this was a small 
matter, but for me it was very different. My total capital on 
arrival at Mokameh Ghat had been one hundred and fifty 
rupees, and there was no one in all the world I could call on to 
help me with a loan, so until the Railway paid me I could not 
pay my men. 

I have entitled this story Loyalty and I do not think that anyone 



has ever received greater loyalty than I did, not only from my 
labour, but also from the railway staff, during those first three 
months that I was at Mokameh Ghat. Nor do I think that men 
have ever worked harder. The work started every morning, 
weekdays and Sundays alike, at 4 a.m., and continued without 
interruption up to 8 p.m. The clerks whose duty it was to check 
and tally the goods took their meals at different hours to avoid 
a stoppage of work and my men ate their food, which was 
brought to them by wives, mothers, or daughters, in the sheds. 
There were no trade unions or slaves and slave-drivers in those 
days and every individual was at liberty to work as many, or as 
few, hours as he or she wished to. And everyone worked 
cheerfully and happily; for no matter whether it was the 
procuring of more and better food and clothing for the family, 
the buying of a new ox to replace a worn-out one, or the 
paying-off of a debt, the incentive, without which no man can 
work his best, was there. My work and Ram Saran's did not 
end when the men knocked off work, for there was 
correspondence to attend to, and the next day's work to be 
planned and arranged for, and during those first three months 
neither of us spent more than four hours in bed each night. I 
was not twenty-one and as hard as nails, but Ram Saran was 
twenty years older and soft, and at the end of the three months 
he had lost a stone in weight but none of his cheerfulness. 

Lack of money was now a constant worry to me, and as week 
succeeded week the worry became a hideous nightmare that 
never left me. First the headmen and then the labourers 
pledged their cheap and pitiful bits of jewellery and now all 
credit had gone; and to make matters worse, the men of the 
Labour Company, who were jealous that my men had earned 
more than they did, were beginning to taunt my men. On 
several occasions ugly incidents were narrowly avoided, for 
semi-starvation had not impaired the loyalty of my men and 
they were willing to give battle to anyone who as much as 
hinted that I had tricked them into working for me, and that 
they would never see a pice of the money they had earned. The 



monsoon was late in coming that year and the red ball in the 
sky fanned by a wind from an unseen furnace, was making life 
a burden. At the end of a long and a very trying day I received 
a telegram from Samaria Ghat informing me that an engine had 
been derailed on the slipway that fed the barges on which 
wagons were ferried across to Mokameh Ghat. A launch 
conveyed me across the river and twice within the next three 
hours the engine was replaced on the track, with the aid of 
hand jacks, only to be derailed again. It was not until the wind 
had died down and the powdery sand could be packed under 
the wooden sleepers that the engine was re-railed for the third 
time, and the slipway again brought into use. Tired and worn 
out, and with eyes swollen and sore from the wind and sand, I 
had just sat down to my first meal that day when my twelve 
headmen filed into the room, and seeing my servant placing a 
plate in front of me, with the innate courtesy of Indians, filed 
out again. I then, as I ate my dinner, heard the following 
conversation taking place in the veranda. 

One of the headme: What was on the plate you put in front of 
the sahib? 

My servant: A chapati and a little dal. 

One of the headmen: Why only one chapati and a little dal? 

My servant: Because there is no money to buy more. 

One of the headmen: What else does the sahib eat? 

My servant: Nothing. 

After a short silence I heard the oldest of the headmen, a 
Mohammedan with a great beard dyed with henna, say to his 
companions, 'Go home. I will stay and speak to the sahib. 1 
When my servant had removed the empty plate the old 
headman requested permission to enter the room, and standing 
before me spoke as follows: 'We came to tell you that our 
stomachs have long been empty and that after tomorrow it 
would be no longer possible for us to work. But we have seen 



tonight that your case is as bad as ours and we will carry on as 
long as we have strength to stand. I will, with your permission, 
go now, sahib, and, for the sake of Allah, I beg you will do 
something to help us . 1 

Every day for weeks I had been appealing to headquarters at 
Gorakhpur for funds and the only reply I could elicit was that 
steps were being taken to make early payment of my bills. After 
the bearded headman left me that night I walked across to the 
Telegraph Office, where the telegraphist on duty was sending 
the report I submitted each night of the work done during the 
day, took a form off his table and told him to clear the line for 
an urgent message to Gorakhpur. It was then a few minutes 
after midnight and the message I sent read: 'Work at Mokameh 
Ghat ceases at midday today unless I am assured that twelve 
thousand rupees has been dispatched by morning train.' The 
telegraphist read the message over and looking up at me said: 
'If I have your permission I will tell my brother, who is on duty 
at this hour, to deliver the message at once and not wait until 
office hours in the morning.' Ten hours later, and with two 
hours of my ultimatum still to run, I saw a telegraph messenger 
hurrying towards me with a buff-coloured envelope in his hand. 
Each group of men he passed stopped work to stare after him, 
for everyone in Mokameh Ghat knew the purport of the 
telegram I had sent at midnight. 

After I had read the telegram the messenger, who was the son 
of my office peon, asked if the news was good; and when I told 
him it was good, he dashed off and his passage down the sheds 
was punctuated by shouts of delight. The money could not 
arrive until the following morning, but what did a few hours 
matter to those who had waited for long months? 

The pay clerk who presented himself at my office next day, 
accompanied by some of my men carrying a cash chest slung 
on a bamboo pole and guarded by two policemen, was a jovial 
Hindu who was as broad as he was long and who exuded good 
humour and sweat in equal proportions. I never saw him 



without a pair of spectacles tied across his forehead with red 
tape. Having settled himself on the floor of my office he drew 
on a cord tied round his neck and from somewhere deep down 
in his person pulled up a key He opened the cash chest, and 
lifted out twelve string-bags each containing one thousand 
freshly minted silver rupees. He licked a stamp, and stuck it to 
the receipt I had signed. Then, delving into a pocket that would 
comfortably have housed two rabbits, he produced an envelope 
containing bank notes to the value of four hundred and fifty 
rupees, my arrears of pay for three months. 

I do not think anyone has ever had as great pleasure in paying 
out money as I had when I placed a bag containing a thousand 
rupees into the hands of each of the twelve headmen, nor do I 
think men have ever received money with greater pleasure 
than they did. The advent of the fat pay clerk had relieved a 
tension that had become almost unbearable, and the occasion 
called for some form of celebration, so the remainder of the day 
was declared a holiday— the first my men and I had indulged in 
for ninety-five days. I do not know how the others spent their 
hours of relaxation. For myself, I am not ashamed to admit that 
I spent mine in sound and restful sleep. 

For twenty-one years my men and I worked the handling 
contract at Mokameh Ghat, and during the whole of that long 
period, and even when I was absent in France and in 
Waziristan during the 1914-18 war, the traffic flowed smoothly 
through the main outlet of the Bengal and North Western 
Railway with never a hitch. When we took over the contract, 
between four and five hundred thousand tons of goods were 
passing through Mokameh Ghat, and when I handed over to 
Ram Saran the traffic had increased to a million tons. 



IX - Budhu 

BUDHU was a man of the Depressed Class, and during all the 
years I knew him I never saw him smile: his life had been too 
hard and the iron had entered deep into his very soul. He was 
about thirty-five years of age, a tall gaunt man, with a wife and 
two young children, when he applied to me for work. At his 
request I put him on to trans-shipping coal from broad-gauge 
trucks to metre-gauge wagons at Mokameh Ghat, for in this 
task men and women could work together, and Budhu wanted 
his wife to work with him. The broad-gauge trucks and metre- 
gauge wagons stood opposite each other with a four-foot-wide 
sloping platform between, and the coal had to be partly 
shovelled and partly carried in baskets from the trucks into the 
wagons. The work was cruelly hard, for there was no covering 
to the platform. In winter the men and women worked in bitter 
cold, often wet with rain for days on end, and in summer the 
brick platform and the iron floors of the trucks and wagons 
blistered their bare feet. A shovel in the hands of a novice, 
working for his bread and the bread of his children, is a cruel 
tool. The first day's work leaves the hands red and sore and the 
back with an ache that is a torment. On the second day blisters 
form on the hands, and the ache in the back becomes an even 
greater torment. On the third day the blisters break and 
become septic, and the back can with difficulty be 
straightened. Thereafter for a week or ten days only guts, and 
plenty of them, can keep the sufferer at work— as I know from 
experience. 

Budhu and his wife went through all these phases, and often, 
when they had done sixteen hours' piece work and were 
dragging themselves to the quarters I had provided for them, I 
was tempted to tell them they had suffered enough and should 
look for other less strenuous work. But they were making good 
wages, better (Budhu said) than they had ever made before, so 
I let them carry on, and the day came when with hardened 
hands and backs that no longer ached they left their work with 
as brisk and as light a step as they had approached it. 



I had some two hundred men and women trans-shipping coal at 
that time, for the coal traffic was as heavy as it always was in 
the summer. India was an exporting country in those days, and 
the wagons that took the grain, opium, indigo, hides, and bones 
to Calcutta returned from the collieries in Bengal loaded with 
coal, five hundred thousand tons of which passed through 
Mokameh Ghat. 

One day Budhu and his wife were absent from work. Dhamari, 
the headman of the coal gang, informed me that Budhu had 
received a postcard the previous day and had left that morning 
with his family, saying he would return to work as soon as it 
was possible for him to do so. Two months later the family 
returned and reoccupied their quarters, and Budhu and his 
wife worked as industriously as they had always done. At about 
the same time the following year Budhu, whose frame had now 
filled out, and his wife, who had lost her haggard look, again 
absented themselves from work. On this occasion they were 
absent three months, and looked tired and worn out on their 
return. Except when consulted, or when information was 
voluntarily given, I never inquired into the private affairs of my 
work people, for Indians are sensitive on this point; so I did not 
know why Budhu periodically left his work which he invariably 
did after receiving a postcard. The post for the work people 
was delivered to the headmen and distributed by them to the 
men and women working under them, so I instructed Chamari 
to send Budhu to me the next time he received a card. Nine 
months later, when the coal traffic was unusually heavy and 
every man and woman in my employ was working to full 
capacity, Budhu, carrying a post card in his hand, presented 
himself at my office. The postcard was in a script that I could 
not read so I asked Budhu to read it to me. This he could not 
do, for he had not been taught to read and write, but he said 
Chamari had read it to him and that it was an order from his 
master to come at once as the crops were ready to harvest. The 
following was Budhu's story as he told it to me that day in my 
office, and his story is the story of millions of poor people in 



India. 


'My grandfather, who was a field labourer, borrowed two 
rupees from the bania of the village in which he lived. The 
bania retained one of the rupees as advance interest for one 
year, and made my grandfather put his thumb-mark to an entry 
in his bhai khata (register of account). When my grandfather 
was able to do so from time to time, he paid the bania a few 
annas by way of interest. On the death of my grandfather my 
father took over the debt, which then amounted to fifty rupees. 
During my father's lifetime the debt increased to one hundred 
and fifteen rupees. In the meantime the old bania died and his 
son, who reigned in his place, sent for me when my father died 
and informed me that as the family debt now amounted to a 
considerable sum it would be necessary for me to give him a 
stamped and duly executed document. This I did, and as I had 
no money to pay for the stamped paper and for the registration 
of the document the bania advanced the required amount and 
added it to the debt, which together with interest now 
amounted to one hundred and thirty rupees. As a special favour 
the bania consented to reduce the interest to twenty-five per 
cent. This favour he granted me on condition that my wife and I 
helped him each year to harvest his crops, until the debt was 
paid in full. This agreement, for my wife and I to work for the 
bania without wages, was written on another piece of paper to 
which I put my thumb-mark. For ten years my wife and I have 
helped to harvest the bania's crops, and each year after the 
bania has made up the account and entered it on the back of 
the stamped paper he takes my thumb impression on the 
document. I do not know how much the debt has increased 
since I took it over. For years I was not able to pay anything 
towards it, but since I have been working for you I have paid 
five, seven, and thirteen rupees— twenty-five rupees 
altogether.' Budhu had never dreamed of repudiating the debt. 
To repudiate a debt was unthinkable: not only would it blacken 
his own face, but, what was far worse, it would blacken the 
reputation of his father and grandfather. So he continued to 



pay what he could in cash and in labour, and lived on without 
hope of ever liquidating the debt; on his death, it would be 
passed on to his eldest son. 

Having elicited from Budhu the information that there was a 
Vakil 1 in the village in which the bania lived, and taken his 
name and address, I told Budhu to return to work and said I 
would see what could be done with the bania. Thereafter 
followed a long correspondence with an advocate, or lawyer. 
The Vakil, a stout-hearted Brahmin, who became a firm ally 
after the bania had insulted him by ordering him out of his 
house and telling him to mind his own business. From the Vakil 
I learnt that the bhai khata inherited by the bania from his 
father could not be produced in a court of law as evidence, for 
it bore the thumb-marks of men long since dead. The bania had 
tricked Budhu into executing a document which clearly stated 
that Budhu had borrowed one hundred and fifty rupees at a 
rate of twenty-five per cent, interest. The Vakil advised me not 
to contest the case for the document Budhu had executed was 
valid, and Budhu had admitted its validity by paying three 
installments as part interest, and putting his thumb- mark to 
these payments on the document. When I had sent the Vakil a 
money order in full satisfaction of the debt, plus interest at 
twenty-five per cent., the bania surrendered the legal 
document; but he refused to surrender the private agreement 
binding Budhu and his wife to work without wages on 
harvesting his crops. It was only when I threatened, on the 
Vakil's advice, to prosecute for extortion that he handed the 
agreement over to the Vakil. 

Budhu was very uneasy while these transactions were dragging 
on. He never spoke to me on the subject, but I could see from 
the way in which he looked at me whenever I passed him at 
work that he was speculating as to whether he had been wise 
in leaving me to deal with the all-powerful bania, and what his 
position would be if the bania suddenly appeared and 
demanded an explanation for his conduct. And then one day I 
received by registered post a heavily sealed letter containing a 



much thumb-marked legal document, an agreement also 
thumb-marked, a stamped receipt for the Vakil's fees, and a 
letter informing me that Budhu was now a free man. The whole 
transaction had cost me two hundred and twenty-five rupees. 

Budhu was leaving work that evening when I met him, took the 
documents out of the envelope, and told him to hold them while 
I set a match to them. 'No, Sahib, no', he said. 'You must not 
burn these papers, for I am now your slave and, God willing, I 
will one day pay off my debt to you.' Not only did Budhu never 
smile but he was also a very silent man. When I told him that, 
as he would not let me burn the papers, he could keep them, he 
only put his hands together and touched my feet; but when he 
raised his head and turned to walk away, tears were ploughing 
furrows down his coal-grimed face. 

Only one of millions freed of a debt that had oppressed three 
generations, but had the number been legion my pleasure 
could not have been greater, nor could any words have affected 
me more deeply than Budhu's mute gesture, and the tears that 
blinded him as he stumbled away to tell his wife that the 
bania's debt had been paid and that they were free. 



X - Lalajee 

THE passenger steamer was late in arriving from Samaria 
Ghat. I was standing on the landing stage, watching the 
passengers disembark and hurry up the ramp to the broad- 
gauge train, which I had arranged to detain a few minutes for 
them. Last to leave the steamer was a thin man with eyes sunk 
deep in their sockets, wearing a patched suit which in the days 
of long ago had been white, and carrying a small bundle tied up 
in a coloured handkerchief. By clutching the handrail of the 
gangway for support, he managed to gain the landing stage, 
but he turned off at the ramp, walked with slow and feeble 
steps to the edge of the river, and was violently and repeatedly 
sick. Having stooped to wash his face, he opened his bundle, 
took from it a sheet, spread it on the bank, and lay down with 
the Ganges water lapping the soles of his feet. Evidently he had 
no intention of catching the train, for when the warning bell 
rang and the engine whistled, he made no movement. He was 
lying on his back, and when I told him he had missed his train 
he opened his sunken eyes to look up at me and said, 'I have no 
need of trains. Sahib, for I am dying'. 

It was the mango season, the hottest time of the year, when 
cholera is always at its worst. When the man passed me at the 
foot of the gangway I suspected he was suffering from cholera, 
and my suspicions were confirmed when I saw him being 
violently sick. In reply to my questions the man said he was 
travelling alone, and had no friends at Mokameh Ghat, so I 
helped him to his feet and led him the two hundred yards that 
separated my bungalow from the Ganges. Then I made him 
comfortable in my punkah coolie's house, which was empty, and 
detached from the servants' quarters. I had been at Mokameh 
Ghat ten years, employing a large labour force. Some of the 
people lived under my supervision in houses provided by me, 
and the balance lived in surrounding villages. I had seen 
enough of cholera among my own people and also among the 
villagers to make me pray that if I ever contracted the hateful 
and foul disease some Good Samaritan would take pity on me 



and put a bullet through my head, or give me an overdose of 
opium. Few will agree with me that of the tens of thousands of 
people reported as having died of cholera each year at least 
half die not of cholera but of fear. We, who live in India, as 
distinct from those who visit the country for a longer or shorter 
period, are fatalists, believing that a man cannot die before his 
allotted time. This, however, does not mean that we are 
indifferent to epidemic diseases. Cholera is dreaded throughout 
the land, and when it comes in epidemic form as many die of 
stark fear as die of the actual disease. There was no question 
that the man in my punkah coolie's house was suffering from a 
bad attack of cholera and if he was to survive, his faith and my 
crude treatment alone would pull him through; for the only 
medical aid within miles was a brute of a doctor, as callous as 
he was inefficient, and whose fat oily throat I am convinced I 
should have one day had the pleasure of cutting had not a 
young probationer clerk, who had been sent to me to train, 
found a less messy way of removing this medico who was hated 
by the whole staff. This young hopeful gained the confidence of 
the doctor and of his wife, both of whom were thoroughly 
immoral, and who confided to the clerk that they greatly 
missed the fleshpots of Egypt and the pleasures they had 
enjoyed before coming to Mokameh Ghat. This information set 
the clerk thinking, and a few nights later, and a little before the 
passenger steamer was due to leave for Samaria Ghat, a letter 
was delivered to the doctor, on reading which he told his wife 
that he had been summoned to Samaria Ghat to attend an 
urgent case and that he would be absent all night. He spruced 
himself up before leaving the house, was met outside by the 
clerk, and conducted in great secrecy to an empty room at the 
end of a block of buildings in which one of my pointsmen had 
died a few nights previously of coal-gas poisoning. 

After the doctor had been waiting some time in the room, 
which had a single solid door and a small grated window, the 
door opened to admit a heavily veiled figure and was then 
pulled to and locked on the outside. 



I was returning late that night through the goods sheds and 
overheard part of a very animated conversation between the 
probationer clerk and a companion he was relieving on night 
duty. Next morning on my way to work I saw a crowd of men in 
front of the late pointsman's quarters and was informed, by a 
most innocent-looking spectator, that there appeared to be 
someone inside, though the door was padlocked on the outside. 
I told my informant to get a hammer and break the lock off and 
hurried away on my lawful occasions, for I had no desire to 
witness the discomfiture, richly as it was deserved, of the man 
and his wife when the door was broken open. Three entries 
appear in my diary for that date: '(i) Doctor and his wife left on 
urgent private affairs. (2) Shiv Deb probationer confirmed as a 
Tally Clerk on salary of twenty rupees per month. (3) Lock, 
points, alleged to have been run over by engine, replaced by 
new one.' And that was the last Mokameh Ghat ever saw of the 
man who was a disgrace to the honourable profession he 
claimed to belong to. I could not spare much time to nurse the 
thin man for I already had three cholera patients on my hands. 
From my servants I could expect no help, for they were of a 
different caste to the sufferer, and further, there was no 
justification for exposing them to the risk of infection. However, 
this did not matter, provided I could instil sufficient confidence 
into the man that my treatment was going to make him well. To 
this end I made it very clear to him that I had not brought him 
into my compound to die, and to give me the trouble of 
cremating him, but to make him well, and that it was only with 
his co-operation that this could be effected. That first night I 
feared that in spite of our joint efforts he would die, but 
towards morning he rallied and from then on his condition 
continued to improve and all that remained to be done was to 
build up his strength, which cholera drains out of the human 
body more quickly than any other disease. At the end of a week 
he was able to give me his story. 

He was a Lala, a merchant, and at one time possessed a 
flourishing grain business; then he made the mistake of taking 



as partner a man about whom he knew nothing. For a few years 
the business prospered and all went well, but one day when he 
returned from a long journey he found the shop empty and his 
partner gone. The little money in his possession was only 
sufficient to meet his personal debts, and bereft of credit he 
had to seek employment. This he found with a merchant with 
whom he had traded, and for ten years he had worked on seven 
rupees a month, which was only sufficient to support himself 
and his son— his wife having died shortly after his partner 
robbed him. He was on his way from Muzaffarpur to Gaya, on 
his master's business, when he was taken ill in the train. As he 
got worse on board the ferry steamer, he had crawled ashore to 
die on the banks of the sacred Ganges. 

Lalajee— I never knew him by any other name— stayed with 
me for about a month, and then one day he requested 
permission to continue his journey to Gaya. The request was 
made as we were walking through the sheds, for Lalajee was 
strong enough now to accompany me for a short distance each 
morning when I set out for work, and when I asked him what 
he would do if on arrival at Gaya he found his master had filled 
his place, he said he would try to find other employment. 'Why 
not try to get someone to help you to be a merchant again?' I 
asked; and he replied: 'The thought of being a merchant once 
again, and able to educate my son, is with me night and day. 
Sahib, but there is no one in all the world who would trust me, 
a servant on seven rupees a month and without any security to 
offer, with the five hundred rupees I should need to give me a 
new start.' The train for Gaya left at 8 p.m. and when that 
evening I returned to the bungalow a little before that hour, I 
found Lalajee with freshly washed clothes, and a bundle in his 
hand a little bigger than the one he had arrived with, waiting in 
the veranda to say goodbye to me. When I put a ticket for Gaya 
and five one- hundred rupee notes into his hand he, like the 
man with the coal-grimed face, was tongue tied. All he could do 
was to keep glancing from the notes in his hand to my face, 
until the bell that warned passengers the train would leave in 



five minutes rang; then, putting his head on my feet, he said: 
'Within one year your slave will return you this money. 1 

And so Lalajee left me, taking with him the greater part of my 
savings. That I would see him again I never doubted, for the 
poor of India never forget a kindness; but the promise Lalajee 
had made was, I felt sure, beyond his powers of 
accomplishment. In this I was wrong, for returning late one 
evening I saw a man dressed in spotless white standing in my 
veranda. The light from the room behind him was in my eyes, 
and I did not recognize him until he spoke. It was Lalajee, come 
a few days before the expiry of the time limit he had set 
himself. That night as he sat on the floor near my chair he told 
me of his trading transactions, and the success that had 
attended them. Starting with a few bags of grain and being 
content with a profit of only four annas per bag he had 
gradually, and steadily, built up his business until he was able 
to deal in consignments up to thirty tons in weight, on which he 
was making a profit of three rupees per ton. His son was in a 
good school, and as he could now afford to keep a wife he had 
married the daughter of a rich merchant of Patna; all this he 
had accomplished in a little under twelve months. As the time 
drew near for his train to leave he laid five one-hundred rupee 
notes on my knee. Then, he took a bag from his pocket, held it 
out to me and said, 'This is the interest, calculated at twenty- 
five per cent., that I owe you on the money you lent me'. I 
believe I deprived him of half the pleasure he had anticipated 
from his visit when I told him it was not our custom to accept 
interest from our friends. Before leaving me Lalajee said, 
'during the month 1 stayed with you I had talks with your 
servants, and with your workmen, and I learnt from them that 
there was a time when you were reduced to one chapati and a 
little dal. If such a time should ever come again, which 
Parmeshwar forbid, your slave will place all that he has at your 
feet.' Until I left Mokameh Ghat, eleven years later, I received 
each year a big basket of the choicest mangoes from Lala-jee's 
garden, for he attained his ambition of becoming a merchant 



once again, and returned to the home he had left when his 
partner robbed him. 



XI - Chamari 

CHAMARI, as his name implies, belonged to the lowest strata 
of India's sixty million Untouchables. Accompanied by his wife, 
an angular person whose face was stamped with years of 
suffering and whose two young children were clutching her 
torn skirts, he applied to me for work. Chamari was an 
undersized man with a poor physique, and as he was not strong 
enough to work in the sheds I put him and his wife on to trans¬ 
shipping coal. Next morning I provided the pair of them with 
shovels and baskets, and they started work with courage and 
industry far beyond their strength. Towards evening I had to 
put others on to finishing their task, for the delay in unloading 
one of a rake of fifty wagons meant hanging up the work of 
several hundred labourers. For two days Chamari and his wife 
laboured valiantly but ineffectively. On the third morning when, 
their blistered hands tied up in dirty rags, they were waiting 
for work to be allotted to them I asked Chamari if he could read 
and write. When he said that he knew a little Hindi, I instructed 
him to return the shovels and baskets to the store and to come 
to my office for orders. A few days previously I had discharged 
the headman of the coal gang for his inability to keep sober— 
the only man I ever discharged— and as it was quite evident 
that neither Chamari nor his wife would be able to make a 
living at the job they were on, I decided to give Chamari a trial 
as a headman. 

Chamari thought he had been summoned to the office to be 
sacked and was greatly relieved, and very proud, when I 
handed him a new account book and a pencil and told him to 
take down the numbers of the rake of broad-gauge wagons 
from which coal was being unloaded, together with the names 
of the men and women who were engaged on each wagon. Half 
an hour later he returned with the information I had asked for, 
neatly entered in the book. When I had verified the correctness 
of these entries I handed the book back to Chamari, told him I 
had appointed him headman of the coal gang, at that time 
numbering two hundred men and women, and explained his 



duties to him in detail. A humble man who one short hour 
earlier had laboured under all the disqualifications of his lowly 
birth walked out of my office with a book tucked under his arm, 
a pencil behind his ear and, for the first time in his life, his 
head in the air. Chamari was one of the most conscientious and 
hardworking men I have ever employed. In the gang he 
commanded there were men and women of all castes including 
Brahmins, Chattris, and Thakurs, and never once did he offend 
by rendering less respect to these high-caste men and women 
than was theirs by birthright, and never once was his authority 
questioned. He was responsible for keeping the individual 
accounts of everyone working under him, and during the 
twenty years he worked for me the correctness of his accounts 
was never disputed. 

On Sunday evenings Chamari and I would sit, he on a mat and I 
on a stool, with a great pile of copper pice between us, and 
ringed round by coal-grimed men and women eagerly waiting 
for their week's wages. I enjoyed those Sunday evenings as 
much as did the simple hardworking people sitting round me, 
for my pleasure in giving them the wages they had earned with 
the sweat of their brows was as great as theirs in receiving 
them. 

During the week they worked on a platform half a mile long, 
and as some of them lived in the quarters I had built for them, 
while others lived in the surrounding villages, they had little 
opportunity for social intercourse. Sunday evenings gave them 
this opportunity, and they took full advantage of it. 

Hardworking people are always cheerful, for they have no time 
to manufacture imaginary troubles, which are always worse 
than real ones. My people were admittedly poor, and they had 
their full share of troubles; none the less they were full of good 
cheer, and as I could understand and speak their language as 
well as they could, I was able to take part in their light-hearted 
banter and appreciate all their jokes. The railway paid me by 
weight and I paid my people, both those who worked in the 
sheds and those who worked on the coal platform, at wagon 



rates. For work in the sheds I paid the headmen, who in turn 
paid the gangs employed by them, but the men and women 
working on coal were paid individually by me. Chamari would 
change the currency notes I gave him for pice in the Mokameh 
bazaar, and then, on Sunday evenings, as we sat with the pile 
of pice between us he would read out the names of the men 
and women who had been engaged on unloading every 
individual wagon during the week, while I made a quick mental 
calculation and paid the amount due to each worker. I paid 
forty pice (ten annas) for the unloading of each wagon, and 
when the pice would not divide up equally among the number 
that had been engaged on unloading any particular wagon I 
gave the extra pice to one of their number, who would later 
purchase salt to be divided among them. This system of 
payment worked to the satisfaction of everyone, and though the 
work was hard, and the hours long, the wage earned was three 
times as much as could be earned on field work, and further, 
my work was permanent while field work was seasonal and 
temporary. 

I started Chamari on a salary of fifteen rupees a month and 
gradually increased it to forty rupees, which was more than the 
majority of the clerks employed by the railway were getting, 
and in addition I allowed him to employ a gang of ten men to 
work in the sheds. In India a man's worth is assessed, to a 
great extent, by the money he is earning and the use he makes 
of it. Chamari was held in great respect by all sections of the 
community for the good wages he was earning, but he was held 
in even greater respect for the unobtrusive use he made of his 
money. Having known hunger he made it his business to see 
that no one whom he could succour suffered as he had 
suffered. All of his own lowly caste who passed his door were 
welcome to share his food, and those whose caste prohibited 
them from eating the food cooked by his wife were provided 
with material to enable them to prepare their own food. When 
at his wife's request I spoke to Chamari on the subject of 
keeping open house, his answer invariably was that he and his 



family had found the fifteen rupees per month, on which I had 
engaged him, sufficient for their personal requirements and 
that to allow his wife more than that sum now would only 
encourage her to be extravagant. When I asked what form her 
extravagance was likely to take he said she was always nagging 
him about his clothes and telling him he should be better 
dressed than the men who were working under him, whereas 
he thought money spent on clothes could be better spent on 
feeding the poor. Then to clinch the argument he said: 'Look at 
yourself, Maharaj, 1 — he had addressed me thus from the first 
day, and continued so to address me to the end— 'you have 
been wearing that suit for years, and if you can do that, why 
can't I?' As a matter of fact he was wrong about the suit, for I 
had two of the same material, one being cleaned of coal dust 
while the other was in use. 

I had been at Mokameh Ghat sixteen years when Kaiser 
Wilhelm started his war. The railway opposed my joining up but 
gave their consent when I agreed to retain the contract. It was 
impossible to explain the implications of the war to my people 
at the conference to which I summoned them. However, each 
and every one of them was willing to carry on during my 
absence, and it was entirely due to their loyalty and devotion 
that traffic through Mokameh Ghat flowed smoothly and 
without a single hitch during the years I was serving, first in 
France, and later in Waziristan. Ram Saran acted as Trans¬ 
shipment Inspector during my absence, and when I returned 
after four years I resumed contact with my people with the 
pleasant feeling that I had only been away from them for a day. 
My safe return was attributed by them to the prayers they had 
offered up for me in temple and mosque, and at private shrines. 

The summer after my return from the war cholera was bad 
throughout Bengal, and at one time two women and a man of 
the coal gang were stricken down by the disease. Chamari and 
I nursed the sufferers by turns, instilling confidence into them, 
and by sheer will power brought them through. Shortly 
thereafter I heard someone moving in my veranda one night— I 



had the bungalow to myself, for Storrar had left on promotion— 
and on my asking, who it was, a voice out of the darkness said, 

'I am Chamari's wife. I have come to tell you that he has 
cholera'. Telling the woman to wait I hastily donned some 
clothes, lit a lantern, and set off with her armed with astick, for 
Mokameh Ghat was infested with poisonous snakes. 

Chamari had been at work all that day and in the afternoon had 
accompanied me to a nearby village in which a woman of his 
coal gang, by the name of Parbatti, was reported to be 
seriously ill. Parbatti, a widow with three children, was the first 
woman to volunteer to work for me when I arrived at Mokameh 
Ghat and for twenty years she had worked unflaggingly. Always 
cheerful and happy and willing to give a helping hand to any 
who needed it, she was the life and soul of the Sunday evening 
gatherings, for, being a widow, she could bandy words with all 
and sundry without offending India's very strict Mother 
Grundy. 

The boy who brought me the news that she was ill did not know 
what ailed her, but was convinced that she was dying, so I 
armed myself with a few simple remedies and calling for 
Chamari on the way hurried to the village. We found Parbatti 
lying on the floor of her hut with her head in her grey-haired 
mother's lap. It was the first case of tetanus I had ever seen, 
and I hope the last I shall ever see. Parbatti's teeth, which 
would have made the fortune of a film star, had been broken in 
an attempt to lever them apart, to give her water. She was 
conscious, but unable to speak, and the torments she was 
enduring are beyond any words of mine to describe. There was 
nothing I could do to give her relief beyond massaging the 
tense muscles of her throat to try to ease her breathing, and 
while I was doing this, her body was convulsed as though she 
had received an electric shock. Mercifully her heart stopped 
beating, and her sufferings ended. Chamari and I had no words 
to exchange as we walked away from the humble home in 
which preparations were already under way for the cremation 
ceremony, for though an ocean of prejudices had lain between 



the high-caste woman and us it had made no difference to our 
affection for her, and we both knew that we would miss the 
cheerful hardworking little woman more than either of us cared 
to admit. I had not seen Chamari again that evening, for work 
had taken me to Samaria Ghat; and now his wife had come to 
tell me he was suffering from cholera. 

We in India loathe and dread cholera but we are not frightened 
of infection, possibly because we are fatalists, and I was not 
surprised therefore to find a number of men squatting on the 
floor round Chamari's string bed. The room was dark, but he 
recognized me in the light of the lantern I was carrying and 
said, 'Forgive the woman for having called you at this hour.'— it 
was 2 a.m.— 'I ordered her not to disturb you until morning, 
and she disobeyed me.' Chamari had left me, apparently in 
good health, ten hours previously and I was shocked to see the 
change those few hours had made in his appearance. Always a 
thin, lightly built man, he appeared to have shrunk to half his 
size; his eyes had sunk deep into their sockets, and his voice 
was weak and little more than a whisper. It was oppressively 
hot in the room, so I covered his partly naked body with a sheet 
and made the men carry the bed out into the open courtyard. It 
was a public place for a man suffering from cholera to be in, 
but better a public place than a hot room in which there was 
not sufficient air for a man in his condition to breathe. Chamari 
and I had fought many cases of cholera together and he knew, 
none better, the danger of panicking and the necessity for 
unbounded faith in the simple remedies at my command. 
Heroically he fought the foul disease, never losing hope and 
taking everything I offered him to combat the cholera and 
sustain his strength. Hot as it was, he was cold, and the only 
way I was able to maintain any heat in his body was by placing 
a brazier with hot embers under his bed, and getting helpers to 
rub powdered ginger into the palms of his hands and the soles 
of his feet. For forty- eight hours the battle lasted, every minute 
being desperately contested with death, and then the gallant 
little man fell into a coma, his pulse fading out and his 



breathing becoming hardly perceptible. From midnight to a 
little after 4 a.m. he lay in this condition, and I knew that my 
friend would never rally. Hushed people who had watched with 
me during those long hours were either sitting on the ground 
or standing round when Chamari suddenly sat up and in an 
urgent and perfectly natural voice said, 'Maharaj, Maharaj! 
Where are you? 1 I was standing at the head of the bed, and 
when I leant forward and put my hand on his shoulder he 
caught it in both of his and said, 'Maharaj, Parmeshwar is 
calling me, and I must go'. Then, putting his hands together 
and bowing his head, he said, 'Parmeshwar, I come'. He was 
dead when I laid him back on the bed. 

Possibly a hundred people of all castes were present and heard 
Chamari's last words, and among them was a stranger, with 
sandalwood caste-marks on his forehead. When I laid the 
wasted frame down on the bed the stranger asked who the 
dead man was and, when told that he was Chamari, said: 'I 
have found what I have long been searching for. I am a priest of 
the great Vishnu temple at Kashi. My master the head priest, 
hearing of the good deeds of this man, sent me to find him and 
take him to the temple that he might have darshan of him. And 
now I will go back to my master and tell him Chamari is dead, 
and I will repeat to him the words I heard Chamari say.' Then, 
having laid the bundle he was carrying on the ground, and 
slipped off his sandals, this Brahmin priest approached the foot 
of the bed and made obeisance to the dead Untouchable. 

There will never again be a funeral like Chamari's at Mokameh 
Ghat, for all sections of the community, high and low, rich and 
poor, Hindu, Mohammedan, Untouchable, and Christian, turned 
out to pay their last respects to one who had arrived friendless 
and weighed down with disqualifications, and who left 
respected by all and loved by many. Chamari was a heathen, 
according to our Christian belief, and the lowest of India's 
Untouchables, but if I am privileged to go where he has gone, I 
shall be content. 



XII - Life at Mokameh Ghat 

MY men and I did not spend all our time at Mokameh Ghat 
working and sleeping. Work at the start had been very 
strenuous for all of us, and continued to be so, but as time 
passed and hands hardened and back-muscles developed, we 
settled down in our collars, and as we were pulling in the same 
direction with a common object— better conditions for those 
dependent on us— work moved smoothly and allowed of short 
periods for recreation. The reputation we had earned for 
ourselves by clearing the heavy accumulation of goods at 
Mokameh Ghat, and thereafter keeping the traffic moving, was 
something that all of us had contributed towards, and all of us 
took a pride in having earned this reputation and were 
determined to retain it. When therefore an individual absented 
himself to attend to private affairs, his work was cheerfully 
performed by his companions. 

One of my first undertakings, when I had a little time to myself 
and a few rupees in my pocket, was to start a school for the 
sons of my workmen, and for the sons of the lower paid railway 
staff. The idea originated with Ram Saran, who was a keen 
educationist, possibly because of the few opportunities he 
himself had had for education. Between us we rented a hut, 
installed a master, and the school— known ever afterwards as 
Ram Saran's School— started with a membership of twenty 
boys. Caste prejudices were the first snag we ran up against, 
but our master soon circumnavigated it by removing the sides 
of the hut. For whereas high- and low-caste boys could not sit 
together in cold brittle air the same hut, there was no objection 
to their sitting in the same shed. From the very start the school 
was a great success, thanks entirely to Ram Saran's unflagging 
interest. When suitable buildings had been erected, an 
additional seven masters employed, and the students increased 
to two hundred, the Government relieved us of our financial 
responsibilities. They raised the school to the status of a Middle 
School and rewarded Ram Saran, to the delight of all his 
friends, by conferring on him the title of Rai Sahib. 



Tom Kelly; Ram Saran's opposite number on the broad-gauge 
railway was a keen sportsman, and he and I started a 
recreation club. We cleared a plot of ground, marked out a 
football and a hockey ground, erected goal-posts, purchased a 
football and hockey sticks, and started to train each his own 
football and hockey team. The training for football was 
comparatively easy, but not so the training for hockey, for as 
our means did not run to the regulation hockey stick we 
purchased what at that time was known as a Khalsa stick: this 
was made in the Punjab from a blackthorn or small oak tree, 
the root being bent to a suitable angle to form the crook. The 
casualties at the start were considerable, for 98 per cent, of the 
players were bare footed, the sticks were heavy and devoid of 
lapping, and the ball used was made of wood. When our teams 
had learnt the rudiments of the two games, which amounted to 
no more than knowing in which direction to propel the ball, we 
started inter-railway matches. 

The matches were enjoyed as much by the spectators as by us 
who took part in them. Kelly was stouter than he would have 
admitted to being and always played in goal for his side, or for 
our team when we combined to play out- station teams. 

I was thin and light and played centre forward and was greatly 
embarrassed when I was accidentally tripped up by foot or by 
hockey stick, for when this happened all the players, with the 
exception of Kelly, abandoned the game to set me on my feet 
and dust my clothes. On one occasion while I was receiving 
these attentions, one of the opposing team dribbled the ball 
down the field and was prevented from scoring a goal by the 
spectators, who impounded the ball and arrested the player! 

Shortly after we started the recreation club the Bengal and 
North Western Railway built a club house and made a tennis 
court for their European staff which, including myself, 
numbered four. Kelly was made an honorary member of the 
club, and a very useful member he proved, for he was good at 
both billiards and tennis. Kelly and I were not able to indulge in 



tennis more than two or three times a month, but when the 
day's work was done we spent many pleasant evenings 
together playing billiards. 

The goods sheds and sidings at Mokameh Ghat were over a 
mile and a half long, and to save Kelly unnecessary walking his 
railway provided him with a rail trolly and four men to push it. 
This trolly was a great joy to Kelly and myself, for during the 
winter months, when the barheaded and greylag geese were in, 
and the moon was at or near the full, we trolled down the main 
line for nine miles to where there were a number of small 
tanks. These tanks, some of which were only a few yards across 
while others were an acre or more in extent, were surrounded 
by lentil crops which gave us ample cover. We timed ourselves 
to arrive at the tanks as the sun was setting, and shortly after 
we had taken up our positions— Kelly at one of the tanks and I 
at another— we would see the geese coming. 

The geese, literally tens of thousands of them, spent the day on 
the islands in the Ganges and in the evening left the islands to 
feed on the weeds in the tanks, or on the ripening wheat and 
grain crops beyond. After crossing the railway line, which was 
half-way between our positions and the Ganges, the geese 
would start losing height, and they passed over our heads 
within easy range. Shooting by moonlight needs a little 
practice, for birds flighting overhead appear to be farther off 
than they actually are and one is apt to fire too far ahead of 
them. When this happened, the birds, seeing the flash of the 
gun and hearing the report, sprang straight up in the air and 
before they flattened out again were out of range of the second 
barrel. Those winter evenings when the full moon was rising 
over the palm-trees that fringed the river, and the cold brittle 
air throbbed and reverberated with the honking of geese and 
the swish of their wings as they passed overhead in flights of 
from ten to a hundred, are among the happiest of my 
recollections of the years I spent at Mokameh Ghat. 

My work was never dull, and time never hung heavy on my 



hands, for in addition to arranging for the crossing of the 
Ganges, and the handling at Mokameh Ghat of a million tons of 
goods, I was responsible for the running of the steamers that 
ferried several hundred thousand passengers annually between 
the two banks of the river. The crossing of the river, which after 
heavy rains in the Himalayas was four to five miles wide, was 
always a pleasure to me, not only because it gave me time to 
rest my legs and have a quiet smoke but also because it gave 
me an opportunity of indulging in one of my hobbies— the 
study of human beings. The ferry was a link between two great 
systems of railways, one radiating north and the other 
radiating south, and among the seven hundred passengers who 
crossed at each trip were people from all parts of India, and 
from countries beyond her borders. One morning I was leaning 
over the upper deck of the steamer watching the third-class 
passengers taking their seats on the lower deck. With me was a 
young man from England who had recently joined the railway, 
and who had been sent to me to study the system of work at 
Mokameh Ghat. He had spent a fortnight with me and I was 
now accompanying him across the river to Samaria Ghat to see 
him off on his long railway journey to Gorakh-pur. Sitting cross- 
legged, or tailor wise, on a bench next to me and also looking 
down on the lower deck was an Indian. Crosthwaite, my young 
companion, was very enthusiastic about everything in the 
country in which he had come to serve, and as we watched the 
chattering crowds accommodating themselves on the open 
deck he remarked that he would dearly love to know who these 
people were, and why they were travelling from one part of 
India to another. The crowd, packed like sardines, had now 
settled down, so I said I would try to satisfy his curiosity. Let us 
start, I said, at the right and work round the deck, taking only 
the outer fringe of people who have their backs to the rail. The 
three men nearest to us are Brahmins, and the big copper 
vessels, sealed with wet clay, that they are so carefully 
guarding, contain Ganges water. The water on the right bank of 
the Ganges is considered to be more holy than the water on the 
left bank and these three Brahmins, servants of a well-known 



Maharaja, have filled the vessels on the right bank and are 
taking the water eighty miles by river and rail for the personal 
use of the Maharaja who, even when he is travelling, never 
uses any but Ganges water for domestic purposes. The man 
next to the Brahmins is a Mohammedan, a dhoonia by 
profession. He travels from station to station teasing the cotton 
in old and lumpy mattresses with the harp-like implement lying 
on the deck beside him. With this implement he teases old 
cotton until it resembles floss silk. Next to him are two Tibetan 
lamas who are returning from a pilgrimage to the sacred 
Buddhist shrine at Gaya, and who, even on this winter morning, 
are feeling hot, as you can see from the beads of sweat 
standing out on their foreheads. Next to the lamas are a group 
of four men returning from a pilgrimage to Benares, to their 
home on the foothills of Nepal. Each of the four men, as you 
can see, has two blown-glass jars, protected with wickerwork, 
slung to a short bamboo pole. These jars contain water which 
they have drawn from the Ganges at Benares and which they 
will sell drop by drop in their own and adjoining villages for 
religious ceremonies. 

And so on round the deck until I came to the last man on the 
left. This man, I told Crosthwaite, was an old friend of mine, 
the father of one of my workmen, who was crossing the river to 
plough his field on the left bank. 

Crosthwaite listened with great interest to all I had told him 
about the passengers on the lower deck, and he now asked me 
who the man was who was sitting on the bench near us. 'Oh', I 
said, 'he is a Mohammedan gentleman. A hide merchant on his 
way from Gaya to Muzaffarpur.' As I ceased speaking the man 
on the bench unfolded his legs, placed his feet on the deck and 
started laughing. Then turning tome he said in perfect English, 
'I have been greatly entertained listening to the description you 
have given your friend of the men on the deck below us, and 
also of your description of me. My tan hid my blushes, for I had 
assumed that he did not know English. 'I believe that with one 
exception, myself, your descriptions were right in every case. I 



am a Mohammedan as you say and I am travelling from Gaya 
to Muzaffarpur, though how you know this I cannot think for I 
have not shown my railway ticket to anyone since I purchased 
it at Gaya. But you were wrong in describing me as a hide 
merchant. I do not deal in hides. I deal in tobacco. 1 On 
occasions special trains were run for important personages, 
and in connexion with these trains a special ferry steamer was 
run, for the timings of which I was responsible. I met one 
afternoon one of these special trains, which was conveying the 
Prime Minister of Nepal, twenty ladies of his household, a 
Secretary, and a large retinue of servants from Katmandu, the 
capital of Nepal, to Calcutta. As the train came to a standstill a 
blond-headed giant in Nepalese national dress jumped down 
from the train and went to the carriage in which the Prime 
Minister was travelling. Here the man opened a big umbrella, 
put his back to the door of the carriage, lifted his right arm and 
placed his hand on his hip. Presently the door behind him 
opened and the Prime Minister appeared, carrying a gold¬ 
headed cane in his hand. With practiced ease the Prime 
"Minister took his seat on the man's arm and when he had 
made himself comfortable the man raised the umbrella over the 
Prime Minister's head and set off. He carried his burden as 
effortlessly as another would have carried a celluloid doll on his 
300-yard walk, over loose sand, to the steamer. When I 
remarked to the Secretary, with whom I was acquainted, that I 
had never seen a greater feat of strength, he informed me that 
the Prime Minister always used the blond giant in the way I 
had just seen him being used, when other means of transport 
were not available. I was told that the man was a Nepalese, but 
my guess was that he was a national of northern Europe who 
for reasons best known to himself, or to his masters, had 
accepted service in an independent state on the borders of 
India. 

While the Prime Minister was being conveyed to the steamer, 
four attendants produced a rectangular piece of black silk, 
some twelve feet long and eight feet wide, which they laid on 



the sand close to a carriage, which had all its windows closed. 
The rectangle was fitted with loops at the four corners, and 
when hooks at the ends of four eight-foot silver staves had been 
inserted into the loops, and the staves stood on end, the 
rectangle revealed itself as a box-like structure without a 
bottom. One end of this structure was now raised to the level of 
the door of the closed carriage, and out of the carriage and into 
the silk box stepped the twenty ladies of the Prime Minister's 
household. With the stave-bearers walking on the outside of the 
box and only the twinkling patent-leather-shod feet of the 
ladies showing, the procession set off for the steamer. On the 
lower deck of the steamer one end of the box was raised and 
the ladies, all of whom appeared to be between sixteen and 
eighteen years of age, ran lightly up the stairway on to the 
upper deck, where I was talking to the Prime Minister. On a 
previous occasion I had suggested leaving the upper deck when 
the ladies arrived and had been told there was no necessity for 
me to do so and that the silk box was only intended to prevent 
the common men from seeing the ladies of the household. It is 
not possible for me to describe in detail the dress of the ladies, 
and all I can say is that in their gaily coloured, tight-fitting 
bodices and wide-spreading trousers, in the making of each of 
which forty yards of fine silk had been used, they looked, as 
they flitted from side to side of the steamer in an effort to see 
all that was to be seen, like rare and gorgeous butterflies. At 
Mokameh Ghat the same procedure was adopted to convey the 
Prime Minister and his ladies from the steamer to their special 
train, and when the whole party, and their mountain of 
luggage, were on board, the train steamed off on its way to 
Calcutta. Ten days later the party returned and I saw them off 
at Samaria Ghat on their way to Katmandu. 

A few days later I was working on a report that had to go in 
that night when my friend the Secretary walked into my office. 
With his clothes dirty and creased, and looking as though they 
had been slept in for many nights, he presented a very different 
appearance from the spruce and well-dressed official I had last 



seen in company with the Prime Minister. He accepted the 
chair I offered him and said, without any preamble, that he was 
in great trouble. The following is the story he told me. 

'On the last day of our visit to Calcutta the Prime Minister took 
the ladies of his household to the shop of Hamilton and Co., the 
leading jewellers in the city, and told them to select the jewels 
they fancied. The jewels were paid for in silver rupees for, as 
you know, we always take sufficient cash with us from Nepal to 
pay all our expenses and for everything we purchase. The 
selection of the jewels, the counting of the cash, the packing of 
the jewels into the suit-case I had taken to the shop for the 
purpose, and the sealing of the case by the jeweller, all took 
more time than we had anticipated. The result was that we had 
to dash back to our hotel, collect our luggage and retinue, and 
hurry to the station where our special train was waiting for us. 

'We arrived back in Katmandu in the late evening, and the 
following morning the Prime Minister sent for me and asked for 
the suit-case containing the jewels. Every room in the palace 
was searched and everyone who had been on the trip to 
Calcutta was questioned, yet no trace of the suit-case was 
found, nor would anyone admit having seen it at any time. I 
remembered having taken it out of the motor-car that conveyed 
me from the shop to the hotel, but thereafter I could not 
remember having seen it at any stage of the journey. I am 
personally responsible for the case and its contents and if it is 
not recovered I may lose more than my job, for according to the 
laws of our land I have committed a great crime. 

'There is in Nepal a hermit who is credited with second sight, 
and on the advice of my friends I went to him. I found the 
hermit, an old man in tattered clothing, living in a cave on the 
side of a great mountain, and to him I told my troubles. He 
listened to me in silence, asked no questions, and told me to 
return next morning. The following morning I again visited him 
and he told me that as he lay asleep the previous night he had 
a vision. In the vision he had seen the suit-case, with its seals 



intact, in a corner of a room hidden under boxes and bags of 
many kinds. The room was not far from a big river, had only 
one door leading into it, and this door was facing the east. This 
is all the hermit could tell me, so', the Secretary concluded, 
with tears in his eyes and a catch in his throat, 'I obtained 
permission to leave Nepal for a week and I have come to see if 
you can help me, for it is possible that the Ganges is the river 
the hermit saw in his vision. 1 In the Himalayas no one doubts 
the ability of individuals alleged to be gifted with second sight 
to help in recovering property lost or mislaid. That the 
Secretary believed what the hermit had told him there was no 
question, and his anxiety now was to regain possession of the 
suit-case, containing jewellery valued at Rs. 150,000 (£10,000), 
before others found and rifled it. 

There were many rooms at Mokameh Ghat in which a 
miscellaneous assortment of goods was stored, but none of 
them answered to the description given by the hermit. I did, 
however, know of one room that answered to the description, 
and this room was the parcel office at Mokameh Junction, two 
miles from Mokameh Ghat. Having borrowed Kelly's trolly, I 
sent the Secretary to the Junction with Ram Saran. At the 
parcel office the clerk in charge denied all knowledge of the 
suit-case, but he raised no objection to the pile of luggage in 
the office being taken out on to the platform, and when this had 
been done, the suit- case was revealed with all its seals intact. 

The question then arose as to how the case came to be in the 
office without the clerk's knowledge. The station master now 
came on the scene and his inquiries elicited the fact that the 
suit-case had been put in the office by a carriage sweeper, the 
lowest-paid man on the staff. This man had been ordered to 
sweep out the train in which the Prime Minister had travelled 
from Calcutta to Mokameh Ghat, and tucked away under the 
seat in one of the carriages he had found the suitcase. When 
his task was finished he carried the suit-case a distance of a 
quarter of a mile to the platform, and there being no one on the 
platform at the time to whom he could hand over the case he 



had put it in a corner of the parcel office. He expressed regret, 
and asked for forgiveness if he had done anything wrong. 

Bachelors and their servants, as a rule, get into more or less 
set habits and my servants and I were no exception to the rule. 
Except when work was heavy I invariably returned to my house 
at 8 p.m. and when my house servant, waiting on the veranda, 
saw me coming he called to the waterman to lay my bath, for 
whether it was summer or winter I always had a hot bath. 

There were three rooms at the front of the house opening on to 
the veranda: a dining room, a sitting room, and a bedroom. 
Attached to the bedroom was a small bathroom, ten feet long 
and six wide. This bathroom had two doors and one small 
window. One of the doors opened on to the veranda, and the 
other led to the bedroom. The window was opposite the 
bedroom door, and set high up in the outer wall of the house. 
The furniture of the bathroom consisted of an egg-shaped 
wooden bath, long enough to sit in, a wooden bath-mat with 
holes in it, and two earthen vessels containing cold water. After 
the waterman had laid the bath my servant would bolt the 
outer door of the bathroom and on his way through the 
bedroom pick up the shoes I had discarded and take them to 
the kitchen to clean. There he would remain until I called for 
dinner. 

One night after my servant had gone to the kitchen I took a 
small hand-lamp off the dressing table, went into the bathroom 
and there placed it on a low wall, six inches high and nine 
inches wide, which ran half-way across- the width of the room. 
Then I turned and bolted the door, which like most doors in 
India sagged on its hinges and would not remain shut unless 
bolted. I had spent most of that day on the coal platform so did 
not spare the soap, and with a lather on my head and face that 
did credit to the manufacturers I opened my eyes to replace the 
soap on the bath-mat and, to my horror, saw the head of a 
snake projecting up over the end of the bath and within a few 
inches of my toes. My movements while soaping my head and 
splashing the water about had evidently annoyed the snake, a 



big cobra, for its hood was expanded and its long forked tongue 
was flicking in and out of its wicked-looking mouth. The right 
thing for me to have done would have been to keep my hands 
moving, draw my feet away from the snake, and moving very 
slowly stand up and step backwards to the door behind me, 
keeping my eyes on the snake all the time. But what I very 
foolishly did was to grab the sides of the bath and stand up and 
step backwards, all in one movement, on to the low wall. On 
this cemented wall my foot slipped, and while trying to regain 
my balance a stream of water ran off my elbow on to the wick 
of the lamp and extinguished it, plunging the room in pitch 
darkness. So here I was shut in a small dark room with one of 
the most deadly snakes in India. One step to the left or one step 
to the rear would have taken me to either of the two doors, but 
not knowing where the snake was I was frightened to move for 
fear of putting my bare foot on it. Moreover, both doors were 
bolted at the bottom, and even if I avoided stepping on the 
snake I should have to feel about for the bolts where the snake, 
in his efforts to get out of the room, was most likely to be. 

The servants' quarters were in a corner of the compound fifty 
yards away on the dining-room side of the house, so shouting to 
them would be of no avail, and my only hope of rescue was that 
my servant would get tired of waiting for me to call for dinner, 
or that a friend would come to see me, and I devoutly hoped 
this would happen before the cobra bit me. The fact that the 
cobra was as much trapped as I was in no way comforted me, 
for only a few days previously one of my men had had a similar 
experience. He had gone into his house in the early afternoon 
in order to put away the wages I had just paid him. While he 
was opening his box he heard a hiss behind him, and turning 
round saw a cobra advancing towards him from the direction of 
the open door. Backing against the wall behind him, for there 
was only one door to the room, the unfortunate man had tried 
to fend off the cobra with his hands, and while doing so was 
bitten twelve times on hands and on legs. Neighbours heard his 
cries and came to his rescue, but he died a few minutes later. I 



learnt that night that small things can be more nerve-racking 
and terrifying than big happenings. Every drop of water that 
trickled down my legs was converted in my imagination into 
the long forked tongue of the cobra licking my bare skin, a 
prelude to the burying of his fangs in my flesh. 

How long I remained in the room with the cobra I cannot say. 
My servant said later that it was only half an hour, and no 
sound has ever been more welcome to me than the sounds I 
heard as my servant laid the table for dinner. I called him to the 
bathroom door, told him of my predicament, and instructed him 
to fetch a lantern and a ladder. After another long wait I heard 
a babel of voices, followed by the scraping of the ladder against 
the outer wall of the house. When the lantern had been lifted to 
the window, ten feet above ground, it did not illuminate the 
room, so I told the man who was holding it to break a pane of 
glass and pass the lantern through the opening. The opening 
was too small for the lantern to be passed in upright. However, 
after it had been relit three times it was finally inserted into the 
room and, feeling that the cobra was behind me, I turned my 
head and saw it lying at the bottom of the bedroom door two 
feet away. Leaning forward very slowly, I picked up the heavy 
bath-mat, raised it high and let it fall as the cobra was sliding 
over the floor towards me. Fortunately I judged my aim 
accurately and the bath mat crashed down on the cobra's neck 
six inches from its head. As it bit at the wood and lashed about 
with its tail I took a hasty stride to the veranda door and in a 
moment was outside among a crowd of men, armed with sticks 
and carrying lanterns, for word had got round to the railway 
quarters that I was having a life-and-death struggle with a big 
snake in a locked room. The pinned-down snake was soon 
dispatched and it was not until the last of the men had gone, 
leaving their congratulations, that I realized I had no clothes on 
and that my eyes were full of soap. How the snake came to be 
in the bathroom I never knew. It may have entered by one of 
the doors, or it may have fallen from the roof, which was made 
of thatch and full of rats and squirrels, and tunnelled with 



sparrows' nests. Anyway; the servants who had laid my bath 
and I had much to be thankful for, for we approached that night 
very near the gate of the Happy Hunting Grounds. We at 
Mokameh Ghat observed no Hindu or Mohammedan holidays, 
for no matter what the day was work had to go on. There was, 
however, one day in the year that all of us looked forward to 
with anticipation and great pleasure, and that day was 
Christmas. On this day custom ordained that I should remain in 
my house until ten o'clock, and punctually at this hour Ram 
Saran— dressed in his best clothes and wearing an enormous 
pink silk turban, specially kept for the occasion— would 
present himself to conduct me to my office. Our funds did not 
run to bunting, but we had a large stock of red and green 
signal flags, and with these flags and strings of marigold and 
jasmine flowers. Ram Saran and his band of willing helpers, 
working from early morning, had given the office and its 
surroundings a gay and festive appearance. Near the office 
door a table and a chair were set, and on the table stood a 
metal pot containing a bunch of my best roses tied round with 
twine as tight as twine could be tied. Ranged in front of the 
table were the railway staff, my headmen, and all my labourers. 
And all were dressed in clean clothes, for no matter how dirty 
we were during the rest of the year, on Christmas Day we had 
to be clean. 

After I had taken my seat on the chair and Ram Saran had put 
a garland of jasmine round my neck, the proceedings started 
with a long speech by Ram Saran, followed by a short one by 
me. Sweets were then distributed to the children, and after this 
messy proceeding was over to the satisfaction of all concerned, 
the real business of the day started— the distribution of a cash 
bonus to Ram Saran, to the staff, and to the labourers. The 
rates I received for my handling contract were woefully small, 
but even so, by the willing co-operation of all concerned, I did 
make a profit, and eighty per cent, of this profit was distributed 
on Christmas Day. Small as this bonus was— in the good years 
it amounted to no more than a month's pay, or a month's 



earnings— it was greatly appreciated, and the goodwill and 
willing co-operation it ensured enabled me to handle a million 
tons of goods a year for twenty-one years without one single 
unpleasant incident, and without one single day's stoppage of 
work. 

-END- 



ROOK FTVF.: 
JUNOT.E T ORF. 




Introduction 

IN THE SPRING OF 1985, I was sitting in a courtyard in 
Kaladhungi, Jim Corbett's village tucked against the first of the 
Himalayan foothills to rise from plains: around me was strewn 
the paraphernalia of the movie world. I was there for the 
filming of a drama documentary I had researched and written 
on the life of Jim Corbett, the culmination of years of keen 
ambition and a love and admiration for a man I never knew but 
who had, through his writings, fundamentally shaped my 
personal philosophy and attitude towards the natural world. 

It was a fearfully hot day, even though early in the summer, and 
the film crew were hard at work arranging another set, in a 
local person's house, for the scene of Kunwar Singh's illness 
and Jim's saving of him from his opium addiction. Those not 
engaged in this work were squatting in the short shadows of 
late morning. I was with Frederick Treves, the actor playing 
Jim Corbett— and who looks remarkably like him, more so in 
costume and make-up— resting under the scant shade of some 
paw-paw trees, when one of the local staff on the film crew 
came up to us. 

'Sir,' he announced to me, 'there is an old fellow come who 
wants to meet Carpet Sahib.' He pronounced Corbett as 
'Carpet' as was the way in the Kumaon district. 

I supposed the old fellow wanted to meet the actor— others 
had done so before him, drawn by the magnetism of the 
'glamourous' movies— and so asked Freddie Treves if this 
would be in order. He, with the good grace of the generous 
man he is, agreed, although I know actors shun such public 
contact. 

An incredibly old man appeared. He must have been in his 
eighties, wizen and bent almost double by age. He walked with 
a stick newly cut from a tree and weeping sticky sap. As soon 
as he saw Freddie, he bowed low and sought to press his 
forehead to the actor's feet. 



I said to the crew member, foolishly assuming the old man to be 
perhaps a little senile, 'I think you'd better tell him this is only 
an actor. 1 

This information was translated and a gabble of Kumaoni 
dialect made in reply 

'I have told the old fellow,' the crewman reported, 'that this is 
an actor from England, but he refuses to believe this. It is, he 
says, a legend that Carpet Sahib will return one day and he 
believes this is the true Sahib come back.' Then, with obvious 
reverential astonishment, for the crewman was a city dweller 
from New Delhi, he added, 'This old fellow has walked one 
hundred kilometres to see Carpet Sahib. In just two days...' 

Anyone who has seen the Kumaon foothills will know that 
twenty kilometres would be a feat for an average fit man yet 
this old sage had walked virtually non-stop for forty-eight hours 
on hearing over the jungle grapevine that Corbett was returned 
to his home. It was Carpet Sahib's magnetism, still vibrant over 
the forty years since his departure from India, which had 
drawn the old man and not the spurious trappings of movies 
and modernity. This is the reverence with which the Kumaoni 
people viewed Corbett, and still do. It is the veneration 
afforded to a sadhu, a saintly man who has earned his 
reputation by example: in Corbett's case, by the example he set 
in the jungles of northern India. 

Corbett's famous stories of man-eating tigers and leopard 
hunting make such exciting reading one tends to overlook in 
them, in the heat of the chase retold with such simplicity of 
style and immediacy of effect, the minutiae of detail 
appertaining to the hunter's skill. And, sadly, his man-eater 
books tend to overshadow his other volumes. My India and 
Jungle Lore. In these are shown, to an even greater extent, not 
only the hunter but also the man Corbett was. 

The former volume deals, as every Corbett reader knows, with 
the author's familiarity with and love of India, his home for all 



but the last eight years of his very long life. Here is revealed 
his immense knowledge of India in all her variety: although he 
never travelled to the south of the subcontinent, he knew the 
north and centre well. Yet it is in this book. Jungle lore, that 
one sees the real soul of Corbett, the core of his love affair with 
the land of his birth— the jungles of the north and the people 
(in his mind, both human and animal folk) who inhabit it. 

Jungle Lore is probably the least known of Corbett's books. It 
does not contain sustained anecdotes of hunting dangerous 
cats or in-depth stories of jungle or forest encounters. Instead, 
it deals quite simply— occasionally almost naively— with the 
close relationship between Corbett and the natural world and 
the immense value such an intimacy bears for all men. It is also 
the nearest he came to an autobiography. 

Much of Corbett's childhood, as regards his experiences in the 
jungle, is here— his early forays with catapult and bow-and- 
arrow, his first gun and first adventures: but these are not 
presented as thrilling episodes (although they are) but as 
lessons attended in the jungle's classroom. For Corbett, term- 
time at the jungle school never ended and he never graduated, 
for it is impossible ever to do so: there is always more to learn, 
more to discover and more to observe because the jungle and 
the world of nature is in permanent flux. 

The crux of Jungle Lore, however, is not restricted to learning 
and seeing. It is more to do with feeling, with sensibility and 
sensitivity— and it is here that Corbett stakes his claim to fame 
and posterity— and with presenting nature's case to a world 
fast ignoring the wonders of the animal (and plant) kingdoms. 
For, in Jungle Lore, written thirty-seven years ago, Jim Corbett 
is lamenting the divorce of modern man from his environment. 
He learns the lessons and, like all good teachers, he seeks to 
share his knowledge and the implications of it with others. 

This book has not dated with the passing years. Its import is as 
vibrant today as ever it was, the morality even more seminal. 
Sadly, the morals Corbett espouses are still blatantly ignored. 



Much of Corbett's jungle has gone: the Siwalik Hills which he 
roamed are mostly denuded of trees, ravaged by erosion and 
mostly devoid of tigers and game. He would not recognize his 
Kumaon homeland now. 

Yet pockets do remain. The reader can still wander a little way 
down the wooded firetrack to Powalgarh, still sit on the Boar 
River bridge, still see the wall Corbett and the villagers built 
around their fields to keep the wild pigs out of the crops— 
though the absence of these creatures has long since rendered 
that defence redundant. 

Jungle Lore has a poignant and very pertinent message. It begs 
us to stop the disaster of raping the earth mother, entreats us 
to re-assert and re-affirm our contacts with the natural world, 
to get to know, understand and use to a mutual advantage the 
ways— the lore— of the wild. 

Martin Booth 



Chapter One 

FOURTEEN OF US— BOYS AND girls ranging in age from 
eight to eighteen— were sitting on the wing wall of the old 
wooden cantilever bridge over the Boar river at Kaladhungi, 
listening to Dansay telling ghost stories. The bonfire we had 
made in the middle of the road, from brushwood collected in 
the nearby jungle, had burnt down to a red glow and with 
darkness closing down Dansay had selected just the right time 
and setting for his stories, as was evident from the urgent 
admonition of one of the nervous girls to her companion: 

'Oh don't keep looking behind. You do make me feel so 
nervous. 1 

Dansay was an Irishman steeped to the crown of his head in 
every form of superstition, in which he had utter and complete 
belief, and it was therefore natural for him to tell his ghost 
stories in a very convincing manner. The stories he was telling 
that night related to shrouded figures and rattling bones, the 
mysterious opening and closing of doors, and the creaking of 
boards on stairways in old ancestral halls. As there was no 
possibility of my ever seeing a haunted ancestral hall, Dansay's 
ghost stories held no terrors for me. He had just finished telling 
his most blood-curdling story and the nervous girl had again 
admonished her companion not to look behind, when the old 
horned fish owl who spent all his days dozing on the dead 
branch of a tree roofed over with creepers— where he was safe 
from the attention of crows and other birds that love to bait 
owls— started on his nightly quest for fish and frogs in the 
Boar river by giving vent to his deep-throated call of Ho Hat 
Ho from the topmost branch of the haldu tree that had been 
blasted by lightning and that was a landmark to those of us 
who, armed with catapult or butterfly net, ventured into the 
dense jungle in which it stood. The call of the owl, often 
mistaken by the ignorant for the call of a tiger, was answered 
by his mate who, except in the mating season, lived in 
a pipal tree on the bank of the canal, and was an excuse for 
Dansay to end his ghost stories and switch over to stories about 



banshees, which to him were even more real and more to be 
feared than ghosts. According to Dansay a banshee was an evil 
female spirit that resided in dense forests and was so 
malignant that the mere hearing of it brought calamity to the 
hearer and his family and the seeing of it death to the 
unfortunate beholder. Dansay described the call of a banshee 
as a long drawn-out scream, which was heard most frequently 
on dark and stormy nights. These banshee stories had a fearful 
fascination for me, for they had their setting in the jungles in 
which I loved to roam in search of birds and their eggs and 
butterflies. 

I do not know what form the banshees took that Dansay heard 
in Ireland, but I know what form two of them took that he 
heard in the jungles at Kaladhungi. About one of these 
banshees I will tell you later, the other is known to all the 
people who live along the foothills of the Himalayas, and in 
many other parts of India, as a churail. The churail, the most 
feared of all evil spirits, appears in the form of a woman. 
Having cast her eyes on a human being this woman, whose feel 
are turned the wrong way, mesmerizes her victims, as a snake 
does a bird, and walking backwards lures them to their doom. 
When danger of seeing the woman threatens, the only defence 
against her wiles is to shield the eyes with the hands, any piece 
of cloth that is handy, or, if indoors, to pull a blanket over the 
head. 

Whatever the human race may have been in the days of the 
cave man, we of the present day are essentially children of the 
daylight. In daylight we are in our element and the most timid 
among us can, if the necessity arises, summon the courage 
needed to face any situation, and we can even laugh and make 
light of die things that a few hours previously made our skin 
creep. When daylight fades and night engulfs us the sense of 
sight we depended on no longer sustains us and we are at the 
mercy of our imagination. Imagination at the best of times can 
play strange tricks, and when to imagination is added a firm 
belief in the supernatural it is not surprising that people 



surrounded by dense forests, whose only means of transport is 
their own feet, and whose field of vision at night is limited to 
the illumination provided by a pine torch, or a hand lantern 
when paraffin is available, should dread the hours of darkness. 

Living among the people and for months on end speaking only 
their language, it was natural for Dansay to have superimposed 
their superstitions on his own. Our hillmen do not lack courage, 
and Dansay was as brave as man could be; but because of their 
belief in the supernatural, I am convinced that neither the 
hillmen nor Dansay ever dreamed of investigating what the 
former called a churail and the latter believed was a banshee. 

During all the years I have lived in Kumaon, and the many 
hundreds of nights I have spent in the jungles, I have heard 
the churail only three times— always at night— and I have seen 
it only once. 

It was the month of March. A bumper mustard crop had just 
been harvested, and the village in the midst of which our 
cottage is situated was alive with happy sounds. Men and 
women were singing and children were calling to each other. 
The moon was a night or two from the full, and visibility was 
nearly as good as in daylight. Maggie and I were on the point of 
calling for dinner— the time was close on 8 p.m.— when clear 
and piercing on the night air came the call of the churai], and 
instantly every sound in the village was hushed. In the right- 
hand corner of the compound, and some fifty yards from our 
cottage, stands an old haldu tree. Generations of vultures, 
eagles, hawks, kites, crows, and glossy ibis, have worn the bark 
off and killed upper branches of the old tree. Opening our front 
door, which had been closed against the cold wind blowing 
down from the north, Maggie and I stepped out on to the 
veranda, and as we did so, the churail called again. The call 
came from the haldu tree and there, sitting on the topmost 
branch in brilliant moonlight was the maker of the call, 
the churail. 


It is possible to describe some sounds by a combination of 



letters or of words, as for instance the 'cooee' of a human 
being, or the 'tap, tap, tapping 1 of a woodpecker, but no words 
of mine can describe the call of thechurail. If I said it 
resembled the cry of a soul in torment, or of a human being in 
agony, it would convey no meaning to you, for neither you nor I 
have heard either of these sounds. Nor can I liken the call to 
any other sounds heard in the jungles, for it is something apart, 
something that does not appear to have any connexion with our 
world and that has the effect of curdling the hearer's blood and 
arresting his heart-beats. On the previous occasions on which I 
had heard the call I knew it emanated from a bird and I 
suspected the bird to be an owl, possibly a migrant, for I know 
every bird in Kumaon and its call, and this was no bird of our 
jungles. Stepping back into the room I returned with a pair of 
field-glasses which had been used during the Kaiser's war for 
spotting for artillery and which were therefore as good as 
glasses could be. With these I examined the bird very carefully. 

I will describe what I saw in the hope that someone, more 
knowledgeable than myself, will be able to identify it. 

(a) In size the bird was a little smaller than a golden eagle. 

(b) It stood upright on its rather long legs. 

(c) Its tail was short, but not as short as an owl's tail. 

(d) Its head was not round and big like the head of an owl, nor 
did it have a short neck. 

(e) On its head there was no crest or 'horns'. 

(f) When it called— which it did at regular intervals of about 
half a minute— it put its head up facing the heavens, and 
opened its beak wide. 

(g) In colour it was an overall black, or possibly a dark brown 
which looked black by moonlight. 

I had a 28-bore shot gun, and a light rifle in the gun rack. The 
gun was useless, for the bird was out of range of it, and I was 
frightened to use the rifle. Accuracy of aim cannot be depended 



on in moonlight, and if I missed the bird everyone within 
hearing distance would be more convinced than ever that the 
call was being made by an evil spirit which even a rifle bullet 
was of no avail. After calling about twenty times the bird 
spread its wings, and gliding off the tree, vanished into the 
night. 

The village sounds were not resumed, and next day no 
references was made to the churail. 'When in the jungles,' 
warned my poacher friend Kunwar Singh when I was a small 
boy, 'never speak of a tiger by its name, for if you do, the tiger 
is sure to appear.' For the same reason the people of our 
foothills never talk of the churail. 

The younger members of the two large families who spent the 
winter months in Kaladhungi numbered fourteen, excluding my 
younger brother who was too small to take part in the nightly 
bonfire or to bathe in the river, and who therefore did not 
count. Of these fourteen, seven were girls, ranging in age from 
nine to eighteen, and seven were boys, ranging in age from 
eight to eighteen, of whom I was the youngest. This handicap, 
of being the youngest of the males, saddled me with tasks that 
I disliked intensely, for we were living in the Victorian age and 
when, for instance, the girls went bathing in the canal that 
formed one boundary of our estate, which they did every day 
except Sunday— why girls should not bathe on Sunday I do not 
know— it was deemed necessary for them to be accompanied 
by a male whose age would offer no offence to Mother Grundy. 
The selected victim being myself, it was my duty to carry the 
towels and nightdresses of the girls— for there were no swim¬ 
suits in those days— and to keep guard while the girls were 
bathing and warn them of the approach of males, for there was 
a footpath on the opposite bank of the canal which was 
occasionally used by men on their way to collect firewood in 
the jungles, or to work on the canal when it needed repair or 
cleaning. The canal was a masonry one, ten feet wide and three 
feet deep, and where there was an inlet for irrigating our 
garden the King of Kumaon, General Sir Henry Ramsay, had 



had the bed of the canal scooped out for a few yards to a depth 
of six feet, and every day before I set out with the girls I was 
cautioned not to allow any of them to get drowned in this deep 
part. The entering of running water while wearing a thin cotton 
nightdress is a difficult feat, if the proprieties are to be 
maintained, for if the unwary step into three feet of water and 
sit down— as all girls appear to want to do the moment they 
get into the water— the nightdress rises up and flows over the 
head, to the consternation of all beholders. When this 
happened, as it very frequently did, I was under strict orders to 
look the other way. 

While I was guarding the girls, and looking the other way when 
the necessity arose, the other boys armed with catapults and 
fishing-rods were making their way up the canal bank to the 
deep pool at the head of the canal, competing as they went as 
to who could shoot down the highest flower off the samal trees 
they passed, or put the first pellet into the ficus tree on the 
canal bank, a hit only being allowed when the milk-like sap— 
the best medium for the making of birdlime— trickled down the 
bole of the tree. And there were birds to be fired at, hair- 
crested drongos, golden orioles, and rosy pastors that drink the 
nectar of the samal flowers; common, slaty, and rose-headed 
paroquets that nipped off the samal flowers and, after nibbling 
a small portion, dropped the flowers to the ground for deer and 
pigs to eat; crested pied kingfishers who when disturbed went 
skimming up the canal, and always the horned owl— the mate 
of the one who lived on the far side of the Boar bridge— whose 
perch was on a branch of the pipal tree overhanging the canal, 
and who had never been known to let anyone get within 
catapult range but who nevertheless was always fired at. 
Arrived at the big pool there would be fierce competition to see 
who could land the most fish on improvised tackle of thread 
borrowed from their respective mother's or sister's work 
baskets, bent pins for those who could not afford the regulation 
hook, and rods made from the side-shoots of bamboos. The 
fishing ended when the supply of paste, used as bait, was 



exhausted or had been dropped by a careless hand into the 
water, and with a catch of a few small mahseer— for our rivers 
were full of fish— clothes were hastily discarded and all lined 
up on the big rock overhanging the pool and, at a signal, dived 
off to see who could reach the far bank first. And while the 
others were indulging in these fascinating sports I, a mile 
lower down the canal, was being told to look the other way or 
being reprimanded for not having given warning of the 
approach of the old villager who had passed carrying a load of 
wood on his head. One advantage I derived from my enforced 
labour, it let me into all the secret plans the girls made for the 
playing of practical jokes on the boy members of the two 
families in general, and on Dansay and Neil Fleming in 
particular. 

Dansay and Neil were both mad Irishmen, and here their 
similarity ended, for while Dansay was short, hairy, and as 
strong as a grizzly bear, Neil was tall and willowy and as fair as 
a lily. The difference even went deeper, for whereas Dansay 
would think nothing of shouldering his muzzle-loading rifle and 
stalking and shooting tigers on foot, Neil had a horror of the 
jungles and had never been known to fire a gun. One thing they 
had in common, hatred of each other, for both were madly in 
love with all the girls. Dansay— who had been disinherited by 
his father, a General, for refusing to go into the Army— had 
been at a Public School with my elder brothers and was at that 
time resting between the job he had lost in the Forest Service 
and the one he hoped some day to get in the Political Service. 
Neil on the other hand was a working man, assistant to my 
brother Tom in the Postal Service; and the fact that neither was 
in a position to dream of matrimony in no way damped their 
affection for the girls or lessened their jealousy of each other. 

From conversations overheard on the canal bank I learned that 
friend Neil on his last visit to Kaladhungi had been too full of 
himself and was beginning to imagine things, whereas Dansay 
on the other hand was too subdued and very slow in coming 
forward. To rectify this unsatisfactory state of affairs it was 



thought necessary to pull Neil down a whole row of pegs, and 
elevate Dansay a little: 'Not too much, my dear, or he will then 
begin to imagine things. 1 What 'imagining things' meant I did 
not know, and I thought it best not to ask. To accomplish these 
desired ends, with one stroke if possible, it would be necessary 
to include both the too ardent Neil, and the too slow Dan in the 
same practical joke. Many plans were discussed and the one 
eventually agreed on needed the co-operation of brother Tom. 
Work during the winter months was not heavy in Naini Tal and 
Tom was in the habit of allowing Neil to absent himself every 
alternate week from Saturday evening to Monday morning. 

This brief holiday Neil spent with one or other of the two 
families in Kaladhungi, in both of which he was welcome for his 
genial nature and his grand voice. Accordingly a letter was sent 
to Tom asking him to detain Neil on one pretext or another on 
the coming Saturday evening, and to send him off on his 
fifteen-mile walk to Kaladhungi so as to arrive at the end of his 
journey as night was falling. Further, Tom was to hint to Neil 
that the girls would probably get alarmed at his late arrival and 
would walk up the road to meet him. The plan that had been 
agreed on for this, the greatest of all practical jokes, was that 
Dansay, sewn up in one of his bear skins, was to be conducted 
by the girls two miles up the Naini Tal road to where there was 
a sharp bend on the road. At this point Dansay was to take up 
position behind a rock and, when Neil arrived, roar at him in a 
bear-like manner. Neil, on seeing the bear, was expected to 
dash down the road into the arms of the waiting girls who, on 
hearing his story, would pass uncomplimentary remarks on his 
bravery, and scream with laughter in which Dansay would join 
when he arrived on the scene a minute later. Dansay raised 
objections, which he withdrew when he was told that the strip 
of red flannel he had found in his ham sandwich, and which had 
caused him a lot of embarrassment at a picnic two weeks 
previously, had been inserted at Neil's suggestion. 

Traffic on the Kaladhungi-Naini Tal road ceased at sundown 
and on the appointed evening Dansay, sewn into one of his bear 



skins, was led by the girls, at times on all fours and at times on 
his flat feet, to the pre-arranged spot where— the evening 
being warm and the skin having been sewn over his clothes— 
he arrived in a bath of sweat. In the meantime up in Naini Tal 
Neil was chafing at being given one job after another until the 
time had passed when he usually started on his walk to 
Kaladhungi. Eventually he was told that he could go, and 
before he left, Tom produced his shot gun and putting two 
cartridges into it placed it in Neil's hands and warned him that 
it was only to be used in emergency The road from Naini Tal to 
Kaladhungi is downhill most of the way and for the first eight 
miles passes through patches of cultivation; thereafter, and 
right clown to Kaladhungi, it runs through more or less dense 
forest. Dansay and the girls had been in their respective 
positions for some time, and the light was beginning to fade, 
when down the road came Neil singing 'Killarney' at the top of 
his voice, to keep his courage up. The singing came nearer and 
nearer— the girls said later that they had never heard Neil in 
better voice— and then round the bend where Dansay was 
waiting for him came Neil. Acting on instructions, Dansay stood 
up on his hind legs and roared at Neil in a bear-like manner, 
and Neil threw up his gun and fired off both barrels. A cloud of 
smoke obscured Neil's vision and as he started to run away he 
heard the 'bear' go rolling down the hill out of sight. At that 
moment the girls came running up the road, and at the sight of 
them, Neil brandished his gun and said he had just shot a huge 
bear that had made a furious attack upon him. Asked by the 
horrified girls what had become of the bear Neil pointed down 
the hill and invited the girls to accompany him to have a look at 
his bag, adding that it would be quite safe to do so for he had 
shot the bear dead. Declining the invitation the girls told Neil 
to go down alone and nothing loth Neil— who was greatly 
touched by the tears of the girls which he thought were being 
shed at his narrow escape from the bear— went down the hill. 
What Dansay said to Neil and what Neil said to Dansay is not 
on record; but when, after a long interval, they scrambled up to 
the road— where the girls were anxiously waiting— Dansay 



was carrying the gun, and Neil was carrying the bear's skin. 
Dansay who in his roll down the steep hillside had been saved 
from injury by the bear's skin, asserted that Neil had shot him 
in the chest and knocked him off his feet. And when Neil 
explained how he came into possession of the gun, which had 
so nearly caused a fatal accident, the blame for the miscarriage 
of the whole enterprise was heaped on brother Tom's absent 
head. 

Monday was a government holiday and when Tom arrived on 
Sunday night to spend the holiday at home, he was confronted 
by a bevy of angry girls who demanded to know what he meant 
by entrusting a man like Neil with a loaded gun and thereby 
endangering the life of Dansay. Tom listened while the storm 
broke over his head, and when the narrator got to the part 
where Dansay had been shot in the chest and knocked off his 
feet and the girls had wept in each other's arms at his untimely 
death, Tom scandalized all present by bursting into peals of 
laughter, in which all but Dansay joined when he explained that 
suspecting— from the letter he had received— that mischief 
was on foot he had extracted the bullets from the cartridges, 
and loaded them with flour. So the net result of the great 
practical joke was not what had been expected, for Neil got 
more full of himself, while Dansay got more subdued. 



Chapter Two 

OWING TO MY ASSOCIATION WITH the girls Dansay 
suspected me, quite wrongly of having had a hand in the bear 
incident out of which he had not come with as much credit to 
himself as had been expected, for the only contribution I had 
made was to suggest that strong twine be used to sew him into 
the bear's skin instead of thread. To no other reason can I 
ascribe his invitation to me one morning— while I was showing 
my companions how to swing from one branch of a tree to 
another— to accompany him on a shoot. Uplifted to the seventh 
heaven at having been selected for this great honour I set out 
with Dansay who— after we had started— said he would show 
me how to shoot a tiger on foot. At the Dhunigar canebrakes— 
the home of tigers as I found in subsequent years— we saw 
many pug marks but no tigers, and on the way home Dansay, 
who was a friend of the family, decided to give me my first 
lesson in firing a gun. At the time he came to this decision we 
were standing at one end of an open glade, at the other end of 
which a number of white-capped laughing thrushes were 
turning up the dead leaves in search of white ants. While we 
had been after the tigers Dansay had carried his muzzle¬ 
loading rifle in his hands and his shotgun— also a muzzle- 
loader— slung over his shoulder. He now unslung the shotgun 
and placing it in my hands pointed to the thrushes and 
instructed me to put my left foot a little in advance of the right, 
raise the gun to my shoulder, hold it steady, and gently press 
the trigger, all of which I did. Even after this long lapse of years 
I am not sure in my mind whether the gun had been specially 
loaded for my benefit or whether Dansay who, as I have told 
you, was as strong as a grizzly bear, was in the habit of over¬ 
charging his gun. Anyway, when I recovered sufficiently to pick 
myself up and take an interest in my surroundings I saw 
Dansay running his hands along the barrels of the gun to see if 
they had got dented on the stones on to which I flung the gun 
as I went heels over head on pressing the trigger. The thrushes 
had all gone but on the ground on which they had been feeding 



we found a white-browed flycatcher, a bird about the size of a 
robin. On examining the little bird we found no signs of injury 
and Dansay concluded it had died of shock, a conclusion with 
which I was in entire agreement, for I too had nearly died of 
shock. 

Shortly after my experience with Dansay's muzzle-loader my 
eldest brother Tom who, on the death of my father when I was 
four years of age, had taken over the responsibilities of the 
family, announced one evening that he was going to take me 
out bear shooting. The announcement was received with 
consternation by my mother who, though she had the courage 
of Joan of Arc and Nurse Cavell combined, was as gentle and as 
timid as a dove. I listened interestedly while Tom— on whom I 
lavished all of a small boy's hero worship— assured my mother 
that there was no danger, that he would take great care of me, 
and that I would come to no harm. When my mother eventually 
gave her consent to my going bear shooting I determined I 
would keep out of harm's way by sticking to brother Tom's 
heels like glue. 

We proceeded that evening— Tom carrying both his own rifle 
and a gun for me— along a game track that ran across the face 
of a great mountain. Half-way across the mountain we came to 
a deep, dark, and evil-looking ravine. Tom stopped at the edge 
of the ravine and whispered to me that it was a grand place for 
bears, who either went up or down the ravine or came along 
the game track. He then pointed to a rock on the side of the 
track for me to sit on, put the gun and two ball cartridges into 
my hands, and warned me to be very careful to kill and not 
wound any bears I fired at. Then, pointing to a solitary oak tree 
on the shoulder of the mountain eight hundred yards away, he 
said he was going there and that if during the course of the 
evening I saw a bear anywhere in his vicinity and in a position 
in which I thought he could not see it, I was to go and tell him, 
and with these parting words Tom left me. 

A wind was blowing, rustling the dry grass and dead leaves. 



and my imagination filled the jungle round me with hungry 
bears. (During that winter nine bears were shot on that 
mountain.) That I would presently be eaten I had no doubt 
whatever, and I was quite sure the meal would prove a very 
painful one for me. Time dragged on leaden feet, each moment 
adding to my terror, and when the glow from the setting sun 
was bathing the mountain side in red, I saw a bear slowly 
making its way along the skyline a few hundred yards above 
Tom's tree. Whether Tom had seen the bear or not mattered no 
jot to me. The opportunity I had been praying for to get away 
from that terrifying spot had come, and I was going while the 
going was still good. So, shouldering the gun, which after my 
experience with Dansay's muzzle-loader I had been too 
frightened to load, I set off to tell Tom about the bear and to 
reattach myself to him. 

The Himalayan black bear, in our part of the world, live 
throughout the winter on acorns. Bears are heavy and acorns 
grow at the extremities of oak branches, and in order to get at 
the acorns bears bend the branches inwards towards the 
centre of the tree. Some of these branches are only cracked 
and remain green for years, others are torn right off and fall to 
the ground when released, while others again are left dangling 
by a strand of bark. I had crossed the ravine and entered a 
dense patch of undergrowth when I heard a rushing sound. 
Petrified, I stood quite still while the sound grew louder and 
louder, and then with a crash a big object fell right in front of 
me. It was only a branch which a bear had left dangling on the 
tree under which I was passing, and which the wind had 
dislodged, but had it been the biggest bear in Asia it could not 
have frightened me more. The courage I had summoned to take 
me to brother Tom had all gone, so back to my rock I crept. If a 
human being in normal health can die of fear, I would have 
died that night and many times since. 

The red glow had faded off the mountain and the light gone out 
of the sky, when a figure loomed out of the darkness and a 
cheery voice hailed me, 'You have not been feeling frightened. 



have you? 1 Tom asked as he took my gun, and when I said I was 
not feeling frightened now, Tom left it at that, for he was a wise 
and a very understanding brother. 

Tom was a great believer in making an early start when he 
went shooting, and the morning he took me with him to shoot 
peafowl he roused me at 4 a.m., made me wash and dress as 
silently as possible in order not to disturb the rest of the family 
and, half an hour later, with a hot cup of tea and home-made 
biscuits to sustain us, we set out in the dark on our seven-mile 
walk to Garuppu. 

In my lifetime I have seen great changes in the forests of the 
Tarai and Bhabar. Some of these changes have resulted from 
exploitation, others have been brought about in a natural 
manner. In some areas where there were dense virgin forests 
there is now scrub jungle, and where there were wide open 
stretches of grass and plum bushes there is now forest. To the 
south east of Garuppu where there is now tree jungle, there 
was (at the time I am writing about), waist-high grass and plum 
bushes. It was this area that Tom was making for on that 
December morning, for the plums were ripe and were an 
irresistible attraction, not only to deer and pigs but also to 
peafowl. 

It was still dark when we arrived at Garuppu so we sat near the 
well while light gradually appeared in the east, listening to the 
jungle awakening. On all sides red jungle-cocks were crowing, 
arousing from their slumbers a multitude of smaller birds each 
of which, as it shook the dew from its feathers and the sleep 
out of its eyes, joined the cocks in heralding the new-born day. 
Presently the peafowl, who were roosting on the 
giantsamal trees, scattered over the wide grass area, added 
their piercing call to the growing volume of jungle sounds, and 
when the rising sun touched the topmost branches of 
a samal tree within our view, the twenty or more peafowl that 
were clustered on the widespreading branches flew down 
among the plum bushes. Getting to his feet Tom knocked the 



ashes out of his pipe, and said it was time for us to enter the 
jungle. The dew in this low-lying area rises to a height of about 
thirty feet, and when going through tree jungle in the early 
morning the moisture dripping from the leaves resembles both 
in sound and in volume a shower of rain. The grass, waist-high 
for Tom and chin-high for me, into which we stepped from the 
road was saturated with dew and we had only gone a few yards 
into it when my clothes were clinging to me, and adding to the 
discomfort of wet clothes the morning was bitterly cold. 

Going in the direction of the samal tree we put up ten or a 
dozen peafowl all of which, with one exception, flew low for 
some distance and resettled in the grass. The exception, a 
peacock in full plumage, rose at a steep angle and alighted on a 
branch of the samal tree. Tom now filled me with delight by 
putting his 12-bore breach-loading hammer gun into my hands, 
and telling me to go forward and shoot the peacock. I had a 
distance of a hundred and fifty yards to go and when I had 
covered forty yards I stopped, and as I was trying to cock the 
gun I heard a low whistle and on looking round saw Tom 
beckoning to me. On my rejoining him he said I was out of 
range where I had stopped, and when I told him I had not 
stopped to fire the gun, but to cock it, he said I must never 
cock a gun until I was ready to fire for it was dangerous 
anywhere to carry a cocked gun and most of all in grass where 
one was liable to trip up or stumble into unseen holes. 'Now,' 
he said, 'go forward and have another try. 1 On this second 
occasion— taking advantage of a big plum bush— I crept up to 
within easy range. The samal tree was leafless but was covered 
with big red flowers, and sitting on a branch on my side of the 
tree, with the slanting rays of the sun shining on it, was the 
most beautiful peacock I had ever seen. The time had now 
come to cock the gun but what with excitement and my frozen 
fingers I found it impossible to draw back the hammers, and 
while I was wondering what to do next the peacock flew away. 
'Never mind/ Tom said when he came up to me. 'You will have 
better luck next time.' But no more birds obliged me by flying 



into trees that morning, and after Tom had shot a red jungle- 
cock and three peafowl we left the grass and plum jungle and 
regaining the road made for home and a late breakfast. 



Chapter Three 

WITH THE THREE LESSONS I have detailed, my jungle 
training— as far as my elders were concerned— was over. I had 
been shown how to handle and to fire a gun, and I had been 
taken into jungles in which there were tigers and bears with 
the object, I believe, of showing me that no danger was to be 
apprehended from unwounded animals. Lessons well learnt 
when young are never afterwards forgotten, and I had learnt 
my lessons well. Whether or not from now onwards I took 
advantage of these lessons to interest myself in any form of 
field sport was entirely my own concern, and I am glad it was 
so. I am glad the decision was left with me and that I was not 
told I must do this or must do that not because of any desire on 
my part, but because my elders considered it was the right 
thing for a boy of my age to do. 

Boys are not lacking in intelligence, and where facilities for 
field sports exist— as they do in most parts of India— they 
should not be deprived of the pleasure of selecting the form of 
sport that most appeals to them and for which they are 
physically fitted, or of eschewing field sports altogether if they 
have no interest in them and are averse to taking life. 
Compulsion— no matter how well veiled— even though it 
follows the lines of an individual's inclinations, takes, in my 
opinion, all the joy out of any form of sport. 

Tom helped my mother and my sisters to nurse me through a 
life-and-death struggle with pneumonia, and when an incentive 
was needed to make me take an interest in the life that had so 
nearly slipped through my fingers, he gave me my first 
catapult. Sitting on my bed Tom produced the catapult from his 
pocket, and putting it into my hands, took a cup of beef juice 
off the bed-side table and told me I must drink it in order to get 
strong enough to use the catapult. Thereafter I took without 
protest all that was offered me, and as I regained strength Tom 
assisted the other members of the family to keep my interest 
alive by telling me about the jungles and instructing me in the 



use of my catapult. 

From Tom I learned that the year— for sportsmen— was 
divided into two seasons, a close season and an open season. 
During the close season my catapult would have to be put 
away for at this time birds were nesting and it was cruel to kill 
them while they were sitting on their eggs or caring for their 
young. During the open season I could use my catapult freely to 
kill birds, provided I made use of every bird I killed. Green 
pigeons and blue rockpigeons, which abounded in our hills, 
could be shot to eat, but all other birds would have to be 
skinned and set up and for this purpose, when the time came, 
Tom provided me with a skinning knife and a pot of arsenical 
soap. Tom did not include taxidermy among his many 
accomplishments, however, but his demonstration with a 
cock kalege pheasant as subject gave me a general idea of how 
to remove a bird's skin, and practice later made me perfect. A 
cousin of ours, Stephen Dease, was at that time compiling a 
book of the birds of Kumaon and most of the four hundred and 
eighty coloured illustrations in his book were made from birds 
in my collection, or from specimens I specially collected for 
him. 

Tom had two dogs: Poppy, a red pi dog which he found starving 
in the streets of Kabul during the second Afghan war and which 
he brought back to India with him; and Magog, a liver and 
white spaniel with a great plume of a tail. Poppy had no use for 
small boys, but Magog— who was strong enough to carry me 
for short distances— was more liberal minded and in addition 
to constituting himself my protector, lavished all his affection 
on me. It was Magog who taught me it was unwise to pass 
close to dense cover in which animals who were sleeping might 
resent being disturbed, and it was he who showed me that a 
dog can learn to walk as noiselessly through a jungle as a cat. 
With Magog to give me confidence I penetrated deep into the 
jungles where previously I had been afraid to go, and during 
the catapult days we met with one exciting experience which 
nearly cost Magog his life. 



We were out that morning trying to get a scarlet sun-bird for 
my collection when Dansay out for a walk with his Scottie 
called Thistle, joined us. The two dogs were not good friends, 
but they refrained from fighting and after we had proceeded a 
short distance together Thistle put up a porcupine and Magog, 
disregarding my urgent call to him, joined in the chase. Dansay 
was armed with his muzzle-loading shotgun but was afraid to 
use it for fear of hitting the dogs which were running one on 
either side of the porcupine and biting at it. Running was not 
Dansay's strong point and, further, he was hampered with his 
gun so it was not long before the porcupine, the two dogs, and 
I, had left him far behind. Porcupines are very unpleasant 
animals to deal with, for though they cannot project or 'shoot' 
their quills they are tough and very agile on their feet, and 
their method of defence, or attack, is to erect their quills and 
run backwards. 

Before joining in the chase I had stuffed my catapult into my 
pocket and armed myself with a stout stick, but I was able to do 
little to help the dogs, for every time I got near the porcupine it 
ran at me and I was several times saved by the dogs from being 
impaled on its quills. When the chase had covered half a mile 
and we were approaching a deep ravine in which there were 
porcupine burrows, Magog got the porcupine by the nose and 
Thistle got hold of its throat. Dansay arrived when the fight 
was practically over, and, for good measure, he put a charge of 
shot into the porcupine. Both dogs were streaming with blood, 
and after we had pulled from them all the quills we could we 
hurried home— Dansay carrying the porcupine slung over his 
shoulder— to try to pull out with pincers the quills that had 
broken off short and resisted all our attempts to pull them out 
with our fingers, for porcupine quills are barbed and difficult to 
extract. 

Magog passed a very restless day and night sneezing 
frequently and, each time he did so, leaving a big clot of blood 
on the straw on which he was lying. The following day was 
fortunately a Sunday and when Tom arrived from Naini Tal to 



spend the day at home, he found that a quill had broken off 
short inside Magog's nose. After many fruitless attempts Tom 
eventually got hold of the broken end with the pincers and 
extracted a six-inch length of quill, of the thickness of the quills 
that are used for the making of penholders. Blood spurted out 
after the quill had been removed, and as we had no means of 
stopping the flow Magog's life was despaired of. However, with 
careful nursing and feeding he recovered, as did also Thistle 
who had not come as badly out of the fight with the porcupine 
as Magog had done. After I had been given the muzzle-loading 
gun, about which I shall tell you later, Magog and I met with 
two exciting experiences, one at Kaladhungi and the other at 
Naini Tal. Naya Gaon village, which I have mentioned 
elsewhere, was at that time fully cultivated and between the 
cultivation and the Dhunigar stream there was a strip of jungle, 
intercepted with open glades. Through this strip of jungle 
which was from a quarter to half a mile wide runs a game track 
parallel to, and midway between, the cultivation and the 
stream. The jungles on both sides of the stream were teeming 
with game in the way of red jungle-fowl, peafowl, deer, and pig, 
that took heavy toll of the crops and that crossed the game 
track on their way to or from the fields. It was on this game 
track that Magog and I met with our first experience. 

Naya Gaon is three miles from our home at Kaladhungi and at 
crack of dawn one morning Magog and I set out to try to bag a 
peafowl. Keeping to the middle of the wide road, for the light 
was not good and the jungle through which the road ran was 
the haunt of leopards and tigers, we arrived at the point where 
the game track met the road just as the sun was rising. Here I 
proceeded to load the gun, a long business, for first the powder 
had to be measured and poured down the barrel and a thick 
felt wad firmly rammed down on it. The shot then had to be 
measured and poured down on to the felt wad and a thin 
cardboard wad rammed down on the shot. When the ramrod 
bounced off the charge in the barrel, the gun was considered to 
be well and truly loaded. The big cumbersome hammer was 



then put at half-cock and a percussion cap firmly fixed on the 
nipple. When these several items had been performed to my 
satisfaction I stowed away the loading materials in my 
haversack, and Magog and I set off on the game track. A 
number of jungle-fowl and several peafowl crossed the track in 
front of us but none of them stood to give me a shot, and we 
had proceeded for about half a mile when we came to an open 
glade and as we stepped out on it seven peafowl, in single file, 
crossed its further end. Waiting for a few moments we crept 
forward to where the peafowl had crossed, and I then sent in 
Magog to put them up. 

Peafowl when put up by a dog in thick jungle invariably settle 
on the branches of trees, and as I was at the stage when even a 
sitting bird was difficult to shoot, it took Magog's and my 
combined efforts to bring a peafowl to bag. Magog loved 
peafowl above all other game, and after treeing the birds he 
invariably dashed round barking at them, and while he 
engaged their attention I crept up to do my part. 

The seven peafowl after crossing the glade had evidently taken 
to their legs, for Magog had gone at least a hundred yards into 
the dense scrub and tree jungle before I heard a flutter of 
wings and the squark of the peafowl, followed immediately 
afterwards by a frightened yelp from Magog and the angry roar 
of a tiger. The peafowl had quite evidently led Magog on to a 
sleeping tiger, and birds, dog, and tiger, were each expressing 
their surprise, fear, and resentment, in their own particular 
way. Magog after his first yelp of fear was barking furiously 
and running, and the tiger was emitting roar upon roar and 
chasing him, and both were coming towards me. In the general 
confusion a peacock— giving its alarm call— came sailing 
through the trees and alighted on a branch just above my head, 
but for the time being I had lost all interest in birds and my one 
and only desire was to go somewhere, far away, where there 
were no tigers. Magog had four legs to carry him over the 
ground whereas I only had two, so without any feeling of 
shame— for deserting a faithful companion— I picked up my 



feet and ran as I had never run before. Magog soon overtook 
me and the roaring behind us ceased. 

I can picture the tiger now, though I could not do so at the 
time, sitting down on his haunches on reaching the open glade 
and laughing, a tiger's laugh, at the sight of a big dog and a 
small boy running for what they thought was dear life, while all 
that he was doing was to shoo away a dog that had disturbed 
his slumbers. 

I met with one more experience that winter before we left 
Kaladhungi for our summer home in Naini Tal and on that 
occasion I was alone, for Magog had taken french leave to visit 
a lady friend in the village and was absent when I started. I had 
been avoiding dense jungle for some time and keeping to more 
open stretches, and on this particular morning I was looking 
for jungle-fowl near the Garuppu road below Naya Gaon. Many 
birds were scratching about on the road but none of them let 
me get close enough for a shot, so I left the road and entered 
the jungle which here consisted of trees, a few scattered 
bushes, and short grass. Before leaving the road I removed my 
shoes and stockings, and I had only proceeded a short distance 
when I caught sight of a red jungle-cock scratching up the 
dead leaves under a tree. 

When a jungle-fowl, or a farmyard chicken, scratches up in the 
one case dead leaves and in the other litter, it holds its head 
high when looking round for danger and if there is no danger 
near it lowers its head to feed on the exposed insects or corn. 
The cock that was feeding under the tree was out of range so I 
started on my bare feet to stalk it. Gaining a yard or two each 
time the cock lowered his head and freezing each time he 
raised it, I had nearly got within shooting range when I came 
on a shallow depression. One step into the depression— which 
was masked on both sides with knee-high grass— and two 
steps on the far side and I would be in range, and would in 
addition have a small tree against which to rest the heavy gun 
and take careful aim. So waiting until the cock again lowered 



his head I stepped into the depression, and put my bare foot on 
the coils of a big python. A few days previously I had run as no 
boy had ever run, and I now jumped as no boy had ever 
jumped, and as I landed on the far side of the depression I 
whipped round and fired into the writhing mass and ran until I 
regained the safety of the road. 

In all the years I have spent in the jungles of Northern India I 
have never heard of a python killing a human being; even so, I 
know I had a very lucky escape that morning, for if the python 
had caught me by the leg, as it would undoubtedly have done if 
it had not been asleep, there would have been no necessity for 
it to kill me, for I should have died of fright, as a full- 
grown cheetal hind died near my tent one night when a python 
caught it by the tail. How big the python was that I stepped on, 
and whether I killed it or not, I do not know for I never went 
back to look. In that same area I have seen python eighteen 
feet in length, and I have seen one that had swallowed 
a cheetal and another that had swallowed a kakar. 

Magog and I met with our second experience shortly after we 
returned to Naini Tal from Kaladhungi. The forests round Naini 
Tal at that time teemed with kalege pheasants and game of all 
kinds, and as there were few sportsmen and no restrictions 
with regard to shooting areas it was possible for Magog and me 
to go out in the evening after school hours and bag a brace of 
pheasants or hill-partridge for the larder. 

One evening Magog and I walked down the Kaladhungi road 
and though Magog put up several pheasants, none of them 
remained seated on a tree long enough to give me a shot. At 
Sarya Tal, the little lake nestling at the foot of the valley, we 
left the road and entered the jungle with the object of working 
back to the gorge at the upper end of the valley. Near the lake I 
shot a pheasant, and going through dense brushwood and over 
great piles of rocks we had got back to within two hundred 
yards of the road when, on emerging from some thick cover on 
to an open grassy glade, we saw several pheasants jumping up 



from a bed of wild balsam to eat the berries off a low bush. The 
birds were only visible while they were in the air, and as I had 
not reached the stage when I could hit a moving target I sat 
down on the ground, with Magog lying alongside, to wait for 
one of the birds to come out on to the glade. 

We had been in position for some time and the birds were still 
jumping up to reach the berries when on the road— which ran 
diagonally across the face of the hill— we heard a number of 
men talking and laughing. From the rattling of their tin cans I 
knew they were milkmen who had been up to Naini Tal to sell 
milk and were now on their way home to their villages below 
Sarya Tal. I first heard the men when they turned a corner in 
road four hundred yards away, and they had reached a point 
above and a little to our left front when they all shouted 
together as though they were driving some animal off the road. 
Next minute, in the jungle immediately above us, we heard 
some big animal coming in our direction. The undergrowth was 
too dense for me to see what the animal was until it dashed 
into the bed of balsam and put up the pheasants, which went 
skimming over our heads: then out on to the open glade 
bounded a big leopard. The leopard saw us while he was still in 
the air, and as he touched the ground he lay flat and froze in 
that position. The glade sloped upwards at an angle of thirty 
degrees, and as the leopard was above and some ten yards 
from us every inch of him from his chin to the tip of his tail was 
visible. As the leopard appeared I released my left hand from 
the gun and placed it on Magog's neck and I could now feel 
tremors running through him, as I could feel them running 
through myself. 

This was the first leopard that Magog and I had ever seen, and 
as the wind was blowing up the hill I believe our reactions to it 
were much the same— intense excitement, but no feeling of 
fear. This absence of fear I can now, after a lifetime's 
experience, attribute to the fact that the leopard had no evil 
intentions towards us. Driven off the road by the men, he was 
quite possibly making for the mass of rocks over which Magog 



and I had recently come, and on clearing the bushes and 
finding a boy and a dog directly in his line of retreat he had 
frozen, to take stock of the situation. A glance at us was 
sufficient to satisfy him that we had no hostile intensions 
towards him, for a leopard can size up a situation more quickly 
than any other animal in our jungles. And now, satisfied from 
our whole attitude that he had nothing to fear from us, and 
satisfied also that there were no other human beings in the 
direction that he wanted to go, he leapt from his crouching 
position and in a few graceful bounds disappeared into the 
jungle behind us. The wind blowing from this direction carried 
the scent of the leopard to Magog and in a second he was on 
his feet growling fiercely and with all the hair on his neck and 
back on end. Only now he realized that the beautiful animal he 
had watched without any feeling of fear and that could have 
killed him, big as he was, without any difficulty, had been a 
leopard, his most deadly and most feared enemy in all the 
jungles. 



Chapter Four 

BETWEEN THE CATAPULT AND THE muzzle-loader periods 
there was a bow-and-arrow interlude which I look back on with 
very great pleasure, for though I never succeeded in impaling 
bird or beast with an arrow I opened my credit account— with 
my small savings— with the bank of Nature during that period, 
and the Jungle Lore I absorbed during the interlude, and later, 
has been a never-ending source of pleasure to me. 

I have used the word 'absorbed', in preference to 'learnt', for 
jungle lore is not a science that can be learnt from textbooks; it 
can, however, be absorbed, a little at a time, and the absorption 
process can go on indefinitely, for the book of nature has no 
beginning, as it has no end. Open the book where you will, and 
at any period of your life, and if you have the desire to acquire 
knowledge you will find it of intense interest, and no matter 
how long or how intently you study the pages your interest will 
not flag, for in nature there is no finality. 

Today it is spring, and the tree before you is bedecked with gay 
bloom. Attracted by this bloom a multitude of birds of many 
colours are flitting from branch to branch, some drinking the 
nectar from the flowers, others eating the petals, and others 
again feeding on the bees that are busily collecting honey. 
Tomorrow the bloom will have given place to fruit and a 
different multitude of birds will be in possession of the tree. 

And each member of the different multitudes has its allotted 
place in the scheme of nature. One to beautify nature's garden, 
another to fill it with melody, and yet another to regenerate the 
garden. 

Season after season, year after year, the scene changes. A new 
generation of birds in varying numbers and species adorn the 
tree. The tree loses a limb— torn off in a storm— gets 
stackheaded and dies, and another tree takes its place; and so 
the cycle goes on. 

On the path at your feet is the track of a snake that passed that 



way an hour before sunrise. The snake was going from the 
right-hand side of the path to the left, was three inches in girth, 
and you can be reasonably certain that it was of a poisonous 
variety Tomorrow the track on the same path, or on another, 
may show that the snake that crossed it five minutes earlier 
was travelling from left to right, that it was five inches in girth, 
and that it was non-poisonous. 

And so the knowledge you absorb today will be added to the 
knowledge you will absorb tomorrow, and on your capacity for 
absorption, not on any fixed standard, will depend the amount 
of knowledge yon ultimately accumulate. And at the end of the 
accumulating period— be that period one year or fifty— you 
will find that you are only at the beginning, and that the whole 
field of nature lies before you waiting to be explored and to be 
absorbed. But be assured that if you are not interested or if you 
have no desire to acquire knowledge, you will learn nothing 
from nature. 

I walked with a companion for twelve miles through a beautiful 
forest from one camp to another. It was the month of April and 
nature was at her best. Trees, shrubs, and creepers were in full 
bloom. Gaily coloured butterflies flitted from flower to flower, 
and the air, filled with the scent of the flowers, throbbed with 
the song of birds. At the end of the day my companion was 
asked if he had enjoyed the walk, and he answered, 'No. The 
road was very rough. 1 

I was travelling, shortly after World War I, from Bombay to 
Mombasa in the British India liner Karagola. There were five of 
us on the upper deck. I was going to Tanganyika to build a 
house, the other four were going to Kenya— three to shoot and 
one to look at a farm he had purchased. The sea was rough and 
I am a bad sailor, so I spent most of my time dozing in a corner 
of the smoke room. The others sat at a table nearby playing 
bridge, smoking, and talking, mostly about sport. One day, on 
being awakened by a cramp in my leg, I heard the youngest 
member of the party say, 'Oh, I know all about tigers. I spent a 



fortnight with a Forest Officer in the Central Provinces last 
year.' 

Admittedly two extreme cases, but they will serve to emphasize 
my contention that if you are not interested you will see 
nothing but the road you walk on, and if you have no desire to 
acquire knowledge and assume you can learn in a fortnight 
what cannot be learnt in a lifetime, you will remain ignorant to 
the end. 



Chapter Five 

DURING MY CHILDHOOD DAYS, AND the ten years I spent at 
school, and again while I was working in Bengal, and later 
between the two world wars, I spent all my holidays and leave 
in the jungles in and around Kaladhungi. If during those years I 
did not absorb as much jungle lore as I might have done, the 
fault is mine, for I had ample opportunities of doing so. 
Opportunities which will never be enjoyed by another, for 
pressure of population has brought under cultivation large 
areas on which in my time game wandered at will; while 
standardization of forests, with all the evils it brings in its train 
of wild life, has resulted in the total destruction of the trees 
that bore the flowers and the fruit that birds and animals live 
on. One result of this destruction, which in my opinion was 
quite unnecessary, has been to drive millions of monkeys out of 
the forests on to cultivated land, presenting Government with a 
problem which they are finding it difficult to deal with owing to 
the religious prejudices of the population, who look upon 
monkeys as sacred animals. A day will come when this problem 
will have to be faced, and the lot of those who have to face it 
will not be an enviable one, for in the United Provinces alone 
the monkey population— in my opinion— is less than ten 
million, and ten million monkeys living on crops and garden 
fruit present a very major problem. 

Had I realized in those far-off days that a time would conic 
when I would write this book, I would have tried to learn more 
than I did, for the time I spent in the jungles held unalloyed 
happiness for me, and that happiness I would now gladly share. 
My happiness, I believe, resulted from the fact that all wild life 
is happy in its natural surroundings. In nature there is no 
sorrow, and no repining. A bird from a flock, or an animal from 
a herd, is taken by hawk or by carnivorous beast and those that 
are left rejoice that their time had not come today, and have no 
thought of tomorrow. When I was ignorant I tried to rescue 
birds and young animals caught by hawks or by eagles, and 
deer caught by carnivorous beasts, but soon found that in 



trying to rescue one I caused the death of two. For the talons of 
hawk and eagle, and the teeth and claws of carnivorous beasts, 
hold poison in the form of decayed flesh or blood, and unless 
expert treatment is immediately applied— which is not possible 
in a jungle— only one in a hundred of rescued birds or animals 
survive, and the killer, being deprived of its prey, immediately 
finds another victim to satisfy its hunger or the hunger of its 
young. 

It is the function of certain birds and animals to maintain the 
balance in nature, and in order to carry out this function and at 
the same time provide themselves with the only food they can 
assimilate it is necessary for them to kill. This killing is— 
whenever possible— expeditiously and very expertly 
performed. From the killer's point of view expeditious killing is 
necessary to avoid attracting enemies, and I see no reason why 
it should not also be a provision of nature designed to minimize 
suffering. 

Each species has its own method of killing and the method 
employed in individual cases depends to a great extent on the 
relative size of the killer and its victim. For instance, a 
peregrine falcon that does most of its killing on the ground will, 
on occasion, take a small bird on the wing and kill and eat it in 
the air. Again, a tiger that on occasion finds it necessary to 
hamstring an animal before overpowering and killing it will on 
another occasion strike down a victim with a single blow. 

The jungle folk, in their natural surroundings, do not kill 
wantonly. Killing for sport is, however, occasionally indulged in, 
and some animals, notably pine-marten, civet cats, and 
mongoose, will, in abnormal circumstances, kill in excess of 
their needs. Sport has a wide meaning and can be interpreted 
in many ways. In the two instances I am going to narrate it 
should be interpreted liberally. 

When Percy Wyndham was Commissioner of Kumaon he was 
asked by Sir Harcourt Butler, Governor of the then United 
Provinces, to provide a python for the recently-opened 



Lucknow Zoo. Wyndham was on his winter tour when he 
received the request and on arrival at Kaladhungi he asked me 
if I knew of a python that would be a credit to our jungles and a 
suitable gift for a commissioner to present to a Governor. It so 
happened that I did know of such a python, and next day 
Wyndham and two of his shikaris and I set out on an elephant 
to look at the python I had in mind. I had known this python for 
several years and I had no difficulty in guiding the elephant to 
it. 

We found the python lying full stretch on the bed of a shallow 
stream with an inch or two of gin-clear water flowing over it, 
and it looked for all the world like a museum specimen in a 
glass case. When Wyndham saw it he said it was just the kind 
of python he had hoped to secure, and he ordered the mahout 
to undo a length of rope from the trappings of the elephant. 
When this had been done, Wyndham made a noose at one end 
of the rope and handing it to the shikaris told them to dismount 
from the elephant and noose the snake. With an exclamation of 
horror the two men said it would be quite impossible for them 
to do this. 'Don't be frightened, 1 Wyndham said, adding that if 
the snake showed any sign of attacking them he would shoot it 
— he was armed with a heavy rifle. This, however, did not 
appeal to the men, so turning to me Wyndham asked me if I 
would like to help them. Very emphatically I assured him there 
was nothing in all the world that I would like less, so handing 
his rifle to me he joined the two men on the ground. 

I greatly regret that instead of the rifle I did not have movie 
camera in my hands to make a record of the following few 
minutes, for I have never witnessed I more amusing 
scene. Wyndham's plan was to noose the python's tail and haul 
it to dry land, and then tie it up so that it could be loaded on to 
the elephant. When he explained this plan to the 
two shikaris they handed the noose to Wyndham and said that 
if he would pass the noose under the snake's tail they would 
haul on the rope. Wyndham, however, was firm in his opinion 
that the noosing could be done more expertly by 



the shikaris. Eventually; after a lot of advancing and retreating 
and dumb play to avoid alarming the python, all three men 
entered the water, each attempting to hold the rope as far away 
from the noose as possible, and very gingerly they approached 
the python upstream. When they got to within an arm's length 
of it, and while each was urging the other to take the noose and 
pass it under the tail, the python raised its head a foot or two 
out of the water, and started to turn and glide towards them. 
With a yell of 'Bhago Sahib 1 ('Run sir') the shikaris splashed out 
of the water, followed by Wyndham, and all three dashed into 
the thick brushwood on the side of the stream while the python 
glided under the roots of a big jamun tree and disappeared 
from view, and the mahout and I nearly fell off the elephant 
laughing. 

A month later I received a letter from Wyndham informing me 
he was arriving in Kaladhungi the following day, and that he 
would like to have another try to capture the python. Geoff 
Hopkins and a friend of his who had recently arrived from 
England were with me when I received the letter, and the three 
of us set off to see if the python was still in the place where I 
had last seen it. Near the tree under the roots of which the 
python lived was a sambhar's stamping ground. On this 
ground, the earth of which had been churned to fine dust by 
the hooves of generations of sambhar, we found the python 
lying dead, killed a few minutes before our arrival by a pair of 
otters. 

The method employed by otters in killing python, and also 
crocodiles, for sport— for I have never known of their using 
either of these reptiles for food— is to approach, one on either 
side of their intended victim. When the python or crocodile 
turns its head to defend itself against the attack of, say, the 
otter on the right, the otter on the left jumps in— otter are very 
agile— and takes a bite at the victim's neck as close to its head 
as possible. Then when the victim turns and tries to defend 
itself against its assailant on the left the one on the right jumps 
in and takes a bite. In this way, biting alternately and a little at 



a time, the neck of the victim is bitten away right down to the 
bone before it is dispatched, for both python and crocodiles are 
very tenacious of life. 

In the case I am narrating the python measured 17 feet 6 
inches in length and 26 inches in girth, and the pair of otters 
must have run a considerable risk while killing it. Otter, 
however, are big-hearted animals and quite possibly — like 
human beings — they value their sport in proportion to the risk 
involved. 

The second instance concerns a big bull elephant and a pair of 
tigers, and unless my theory of 'sport' is accepted I can give no 
reason for the encounter between the lord and the king and 
queen of the Indian jungle. The encounter received wide 
publicity in the Indian press and many letters on the subject 
were written by renowned sportsmen to the editors of The 
Pioneer and The Statesman. The theories advanced for the 
encounter were: old vendetta, revenge for the killing of a cub, 
and killing for food. None of the writers of the articles and 
letters witnessed the encounter, and as a similar case from 
which deductions might have been made had never been 
known, the theories remained just theories and proved nothing. 

I first heard of the encounter between the elephant and the 
tigers, which resulted in the death of the elephant, when the 
Superintendent, Tarai, and Bhabar asked me if it would take 
200 gallons of paraffin oil to cremate the body of an elephant. 
Inquiries at the Superintendent's office in Naini Tal elicited the 
information that an elephant had been killed by the tigers at 
Tanakpur on rocky ground where it could not be buried, hence 
the claim for the cost of cremating it. This information was 
intensely interesting to me hut unfortunately the trail was ten 
days old, and, further, the evidence had been burnt and heavy 
rain had obliterated all tracks. 

The Naib-Tahsildar of Tanakpur, who had heard but not 
witnessed the encounter, was a friend of mine and I am 
indebted to him for the particulars that enable me to narrate 



the incident. 


Tanakpur, terminus of a branch line of the Oudh-Tirhut Railway 
and a trading centre of considerable importance, is situated on 
the right bank of the Sarda river where it emerges from the 
foothills. Thirty years ago the river flowed along the foot of the 
high bank on which Tanakpur is built, but like all big rivers 
where they leave the foothills the Sarda keeps making new 
channels for itself, and at the time these events took place the 
river was two miles from Tanakpur. Between the main bank, 
which is about a hundred feet high, and the river there were 
several small channels and on the islands formed by these 
channels there was moderate to heavy tree, scrub, and grass 
jungle. 

One day two malhas (boatmen) living in Tanakpur went to 
the Sarda river to net fish. They stayed out longer than they had 
intended and the sun was setting when they started on their 
two-mile walk home. On emerging from a dense patch of grass 
on to the last channel that lay between them and the high 
bank, they saw two tigers standing on the far side ol the 
channel, which here was about forty yards wide, with a trickle 
of water in it, and as the tigers were between them and their 
objective the men crouched down where they were, intending 
to wait until the tigers moved away. These men had seen tigers 
on many occasions and were not unduly alarmed. This point is 
important for when anyone suffers from nerves in a jungle, 
imagination is liable to play strange tricks. At this stage of the 
proceedings there was still a little light from the recently set 
sun, and the full moon having just risen behind the two men the 
tigers standing on the open ground were in clear view. 

Presently there was a movement in the grass through which 
they had just come and out on to their side of the channel, 
stepped an elephant with big tusks. This tusker was well known 
in the Tanakpur forests and it had made itself unpopular with 
the Forest Department owing to its habit of pulling down the 
pillars supporting the roof of the Chene forest bungalow. It was 
not, however, a rogue in the sense of molesting human beings. 



When the elephant stepped out on to the channel and saw the 
tigers on the far side it raised its trunk and trumpeted and 
started to move towards them. The tigers now turned to face 
the elephant and as it approached them one demonstrated in 
front of it while the other circled round behind and sprang on 
its back. Swinging its head round, the elephant tried to get at 
the tiger on its back with its trunk, and the one in front then 
sprang on to its head. The elephant was now screaming with 
rage, while the tigers were giving vent to full-throated roars. 
When tigers roar with anger it is a very terrifying sound, and 
since the screaming of the maddened elephant was added to 
this terrifying sound, it is little wonder that the malhas lost 
their nerve and, abandoning their nets and catch of fish, 
sprinted for Tanakpur at their best speed. 

In Tanakpur preparations were being made for the evening 
meal when the sounds of the fight were first heard. Shortly 
thereafter, when the malhas arrived with the news that an 
elephant and two tigers were fighting, a few bold spirits went 
to the edge of the high bank to try to see the fight. When it was 
realized, however, that the contestants were coming towards 
them, a stampede took place and in a few minutes every door 
in Tanakpur was fast closed. Opinions on the duration of the 
fight differed. Some maintained that it lasted all night, while 
others maintained that it ended at midnight. Mr Matheson, a 
retired gentleman whose bungalow was on the high bank 
immediately above where the fight took place, said it lasted for 
many hours, and that he had never heard more appalling or 
terrifying sounds. Guns shots were heard during the night, but 
it is not clear whether they were fired by the police or by Mr 
Matheson; anyway, they did not have the desired effect of 
stopping the fight and driving the animals away. 

In the morning the residents of Tanakpur again assembled on 
the high ground, and at the foot of the hundred-foot boulder- 
strewn bank they saw the elephant lying dead. From the 
injuries described by the Naib-Tahsildar, it was evident that it 
had died of loss of blood. No portion of the elephant had been 



eaten, and no dead or injured tigers were found at the time or 
subsequently in the vicinity of Tanakpur. 

I do not think that the tigers, at the onset, had any intention of 
killing the elephant. The theory of an old vendetta, anger at the 
killing of a cub, and killing for food are not convincing. The fact 
remains, however, that a big bull elephant, carrying tusks 
weighing ninety pounds, was killed near Tanakpur by two 
tigers and I am of the opinion that what started as a lark— by a 
pair of mating tigers when an elephant tried to shoo them out 
of his way — developed into a real fight. I am also of the 
opinion that when the second tiger sprang on the elephant's 
head it clawed out the elephant's eyes and that thereafter the 
blinded animal dashed about aimlessly until it came to the high 
bank. Here on the round loose boulders, which afforded no 
foothold, it was practically anchored and at the mercy of the 
tigers who — possibly because of injuries received in the fight 
— showed no mercy. 

All carnivorous animals kill their victims with their teeth, and 
those that stalk their prey depend on their claws not only to 
catch and hold but also, on occasion, to disable a victim before 
dispatching it with their teeth. The act of killing, except in the 
case of animals that run down their prey, is so seldom 
witnessed in the jungles, and, when witnessed, the initial 
movements of the killer are so rapid and consequently so 
difficult to follow that after witnessing, possibly, twenty kills by 
tigers and leopards I can give no precise description of the 
movements of the killer at the actual moment of contact with 
its victim. In only one of the cases I have witnessed— 
a cheetal hind feeding down-wind— was a head-on attack 
made. This is understandable, for the horns of the animals 
usually killed by tigers and leopards are capable of inflicting 
very serious wounds. The attacks in the other cases witnessed 
were made by the killers coming up from behind, or at an 
angle, and with a singh spring or short rush getting hold of 
their victims with their claws, and then with a lightning-fast 
movement seizing them by the throat and bringing them to the 



ground. 

In bringing an animal to the ground great care has to be 
exercised, for a full-grown sambhar or cheetal could with a 
single kick disembowel a tiger or a leopard. To avoid injury, and 
also to prevent the victim from struggling to its feet, the head, 
in the act of pulling it to the ground, is twisted round, as shown 
in the sketch. When an animal is thus brought down and held it 
can kick indefinitely without doing its assailant any injury, and 
it cannot rise or roll over without dislocating its neck. It 
occasionally happens that when a heavy animal is brought to 
the ground the fall dislocates the neck, and it also occasionally 
happens that the neck is dislocated by the canine teeth of the 
assailant. When the neck is not dislocated either by its fall or 
by the attacker's teeth, the victim is killed by strangulation. 

I have never seen an animal hamstrung by a leopard, but have 
seen many cases of hamstringing by tigers. In all those cases 
the hamstringing was done by the claws and not by the teeth of 
tigers. A friend once brought me news of the killing of one of 
his cows on the Semdhar ridge six miles from Naini Tal. He 
owned a big herd of cattle and had seen many kills by tigers 
and leopards and from the absence of injuries on this particular 
cow's neck and from the way the flesh had been torn in shreds 
he suspected that it had been killed and partly eaten by some 
unknown animal. The day was still young when he brought me 
the news, and two hours later we arrived at the kill. The cow, a 
full-grown animal, had been killed on a fifty-foot-wide fire track 
and no attempt had been made to drag it away. When the 
condition of the kill had been described to me I had come to the 
conclusion that the cow had been killed by a Himalayan black 
bear. Bears are not habitual meat-eaters but they do 
occasionally kill, and not being equipped for killing, as tigers 
and leopards are, their method of killing is very clumsy. The 
cow had not been killed by a bear, however, but by a tiger, and 
killed in a very unusual way. It had first been hamstrung, and 
then killed by being disembowelled. Having killed the cow the 
tiger had eaten a portion of the hindquarters by tearing away 



the flesh with its claw. Tracking on the hard ground was not 
possible, so I spent the rest of the day searching the 
surrounding forests to try to get a shot at the tiger on foot. 
Near sundown I returned to the kill and sat up over it all night 
on the branch of a tree. The tiger did not return to his kill, nor 
did he return to the kills of nine other animals— six cows and 
three young buffaloes— that he killed in identically the same 
way. 

This method of killing was intensely cruel from a human 
being's point of view, but not from the point of view of the tiger. 
He had to kill to provide himself with food, and his method of 
killing was dependent on his physical condition. The fact that 
the tiger could not use his canine teeth to kill, or to drag away 
his kills, and that he had to use his claws instead of his teeth to 
tear the flesh from his kills, was proof that he was suffering 
from some physical defect. This defect, I am convinced, had 
resulted from a carelessly fired high velocity bullet having shot 
away a portion of his lower jaw. I came to this conviction on 
seeing the tiger's first kill and my conviction— that he was 
wounded and that he was still suffering from his wound— was 
strengthened by the lengthening period between the kills, and 
the fact that he was able to eat less from each succeeding kill. 
His wound had evidently been received over a kill and this 
would account for his never returning for a second meal. The 
killing stopped after the tenth kill and as no tiger was shot or 
found dead in that area I am inclined to think that the tiger 
crawled away into a cave, of which there were many on a 
nearby hill, and there succumbed to his wound. 

Admittedly this was an unusual case, but it was not the only 
case I know of hamstringing, for two of the biggest buffaloes I 
have ever seen killed by tigers had been hamstrung by the 
claws of tigers before being pulled down and killed by the 
tiger's teeth. 



Chapter Six 

WHEN THE RUBBER OF THE catapult Tom gave me perished, 

I made myself a pellet bow. The difference between a bow that 
shoots a pellet and one that shoots an arrow is that the former 
is shorter and stiffer, and that it has two strings between which 
a small square of webbing is fixed to hold the pellet. Practice is 
needed to shoot with a pellet bow, for if the wrist of the hand 
holding the bow is not turned at the exact moment that the 
pellet is released, very serious injury can result to the thumb of 
the bow hand. A pellet bow can shoot with twice the velocity 
that a catapult can, but it is not as accurate as a catapult. The 
Naini Tal Treasury, which was guarded by Gurkhas of the 
Regular Army, was just across the road from our summer home. 
The Gurkhas were keen pellet bowmen and I was often invited 
into the Treasury grounds to compete with them. In the 
grounds was a short wooden post on which was hung a great 
circular gong for striking the hours. On this post a match-box 
used to be placed and from a range of twenty yards the man 
selected to compete with me, and I, each fired one shot in turn. 
The Havildar of the guard, a short stocky man as strong as a 
bull, was the best shot of them all, but— much to the delight of 
the onlookers— he never succeeded in beating me. 

Necessity compelled me to use a pellet bow, and though I 
acquired sufficient accuracy with it to continue my collection of 
birds, I never took to it as I had taken to a catapult, and after 
reading Fennimore Cooper's thrilling books I supplemented my 
pellet bow with a bow to project arrows. If Cooper's Red 
Indians could shoot game with an arrow, I saw no reason why I 
should not be able to do the same. The people in our part of 
India do not use bows and arrows so I had no pattern to work 
on; however, after several attempts I made a bow to my liking 
and with this bow and two arrows— tipped with sharp nails— I 
set out to emulate a Red Indian. I had no illusions about the 
killing powers of my arrows, or their defensive value, so I 
walked warily, for in addition to the jungle fowl and peafowl 
that I hoped to shoot, there were in our jungles many animals 



of which I was mightily afraid. To enable me to approach the 
game I wanted to shoot, and to assist me in seeking protection 
in trees when danger threatened, I discarded my shoes, for 
there were no thin rubber-soled shoes in those days and the 
choice lay between bare feet and hard leather shoes which 
were neither suitable for stalking in nor for climbing trees. 

Two watercourses, dry except after heavy rain, ran down from 
the foothills and met at the lower end of our estate. Both had 
sandy beds and in the jungle between them, which was a 
quarter of a mile wide at the bottom end, a mile wide at the top 
end, and two miles long, was game of all kinds. The canal in 
which the girls bathed formed a boundary between our estate 
and the jungle, and I had only to cross it by a fallen tree to get 
in touch with the game, which included the birds I hoped to 
shoot. In later years, when I had a cine-camera, I spent many 
days on a tree on our side of the canal, trying to film tigers that 
came down to the canal to drink. And it was in this jungle that I 
shot my last tiger, on my release from the army after Hitler's 
war. The tiger killed— at different times— a horse, a calf, and 
two bullocks, and as it resisted all my attempts to drive it away 
I shot it. Sister Maggie doubted my ability to hold a rifle steady 
for many forms of malaria contracted in many jungles had, she 
thought, impaired the steadiness of my hands. However, to 
make quite sure of my shot I called the tiger up for judgement, 
found it guilty, and shot it through the eye as it was looking at 
me at the range of a few feet. It was murder, of course, but 
justifiable murder; for though I was willing to let the tiger live 
in the dense patch of lantana it had selected for its home— two 
hundred yards from the village— and pay compensation for all 
the animals it killed, it was difficult to replace these animals 
owing to the country-wide shortage of farm animals brought 
about by the war, and— as I have said— the tiger resisted all 
my attempts to drive it away. 

Magog and I had explored the strip of jungle between the two 
watercourses very thoroughly and I knew all the places to be 
avoided; even so, I did not consider it was safe to cross the 



canal by the fallen tree and go hunting jungle-fowl and peafowl 
until I had satisfied myself that there were no tigers in it. And 
this I did by examining the watercourse on the left-hand side of 
the jungle. The tigers that frequented the strip invariably came 
from the west at about sunset and, unless they had made a kill, 
returned before sunrise to the heavy jungle from which they 
had come. By examining the sandy stretches along the bed of 
this watercourse it was possible to ascertain whether a tiger 
had crossed into the jungle that I looked on as my private 
preserve, and, if so, whether it had remained or left. On the 
occasions on which I found only a one-way track I left the 
jungle severely alone and went elsewhere to look for birds. 

This watercourse was of never-ending interest to me for, in 
addition to tigers, all the animals and all the crawling creatures 
that lived in the jungles that stretched for many miles on either 
side, crossed it, and in doing so left a photographic record of 
their passage. It was here, first armed with a catapult, then 
with a bow, later with a muzzle-loader, and later still with a 
modern rifle, that I added— a little at a time— to my store of 
jungle lore. Starting out as the sun was rising, and moving 
noiselessly on my bare feet, I saw at one time or anodier all the 
animals and all the crawling creatures that crossed die 
watercourse, until a day came when I was able to identify each 
by the track it made. But here was only a small beginning for I 
had yet to learn the habits of the animals, their language, and 
the part they played in the scheme of nature. And while I was 
accumulating knowledge of these interesting subjects I was 
also absorbing the language of the birds and understanding 
their functions in nature's garden. 

The first thing I did then was to divide the birds and animals 
and the crawling creatures into groups. Starting with the birds, 
I divided them into six groups: 

(a) Birds that beautified nature's garden. In this group I put 
minivets, orioles, and sunbirds. 

(b) Birds that filled the garden with melody: thrushes, robins. 



and shamas. 


(c) Birds that regenerated the garden: barbets, hornbills, 
and bulbuls. 

(d) Birds that warned of danger: drongos, red jungle-fowl, and 
babblers. 

(e) Birds that maintained the balance in nature: eagles, hawks, 
and owls. 

(f) Birds that performed the duty of scavengers: vultures, kites, 
and crows. 

The animals I divided into five groups: 

(g) Animals that beautified nature's garden. In this group I put 
deer, antelope, and monkeys. 

(h) Animals that helped to regenerate the garden by opening 
up and aerating the soil: bears, pigs and porcupines. 

(i) Animals that warned of danger: deer, monkeys, and 
squirrels. 

(j) Animals that maintained the balance in nature: tigers, 
leopards, and wild dogs. 

(k) Animals that acted as scavengers: hyaenas, jackals, and 
pigs. 

The crawling creatures I divided into two groups: 

(l) Poisonous snakes. In this group I put cobras, kraits, and 
vipers. 

(m) Non-poisonous snakes: Pythons, grass-snakes, 
and dhamin (rat snakes). 

Having divided the principal birds and animals into groups 
according to the functions they performed, the other members 
of the jungle folk that performed similar duties were added— 
as my knowledge increased— to the groups to which they 



belonged. The next step was to make myself familiar with the 
language of the jungle folk, and to learn to imitate the calls of 
those birds and animals whose calls are within the range of 
human lips and of a human throat. All birds and all animals 
have their own language and though— with few exceptions— 
one species cannot speak the language of another species, all 
the jungle folk understand each other's language. The best 
three of the exceptions are, the racket-tailed drongo, the 
rufous-backed shrike, and the gold-fronted green bulbul. To 
bird lovers the racket-tailed drongo is a never-ending source of 
pleasure and interest for, in addition to being the most 
courageous bird in our jungles, he can imitate to perfection the 
calls of most birds and of one animal, the cheetal, and he has a 
great sense of humour. Attaching himself to a flock of ground¬ 
feeding birds— jungle-fowl, babblers, or thrushes— he takes up 
a commanding position on a dead branch and, while regaling 
the jungle with his own songs and the songs of the other birds, 
keeps a sharp look-out for enemies in the way of hawks, cats, 
snakes, and small boys armed with catapults, and his warning 
of the approach of danger is never disregarded. His services 
are not disinterested, for in return for protection he expects 
the flock he is guarding to provide him with food. His sharp 
eyes miss nothing, and the moment he sees that one of the 
birds industriously scratching up or turning over the dead 
leaves below him has unearthed a fat centipede or a juicy 
scorpion he darts at it screaming like a hawk, or screaming as 
a bird of the species he is trying to dispossess does when 
caught by a hawk. Nine times out of ten he succeeds in 
wresting the prize from the finder, and returning to his perch 
kills and eats the titbit at his leisure, and having done so 
continues his interrupted song. 

Racket-tailed drongos are also found in association 

with cheetal, feeding on the grasshoppers and other winged 

insects disturbed by the deer; and having heard 

the cheetal give their alarm call on seeing a leopard or a tiger, 

he learns the call and repeats it with great exactitude. I was 



present on one occasion when a leopard killed a 
yearling cheetal. Moving the leopard away for a few hundred 
yards I returned to the kill and breaking down a small bush tied 
the kill to the stump, and as there were no suitable trees 
nearby I sat on the ground with my back to a bush and my cine¬ 
camera resting on my drawn-up knees. Presendy a racket-tailed 
drongo arrived in company with a flock of white-throated 
laughing thrush. On catching sight of the kill the drongo came 
close for a better look at it and, in doing so, saw me. The kill 
was a natural sight to him but my presence appeared to puzzle 
him; however, after satisfying himself that I did not look 
dangerous he flew back to the white-throats who were 
chattering noisily on the ground. The birds were on my left and 
I was expecting the leopard to appear from my right front when 
suddenly the drongo gave the alarm call of a cheetal, on 
hearing which the white-throats— some fifty in number— rose 
in a body and went screaming into the branches above them, 
whence they started giving their alarm call. By watching the 
drongo I was able to follow every move of the unseen leopard 
who, annoyed by the baiting of the birds, worked round until he 
was immediately behind me. The bush in front of which I was 
sitting had few leaves on it, and on catching sight of me the 
leopard gave a low growl and retreated into the jungle, 
followed by the drongo. The drongo was now thoroughly 
enjoying himself and his rendering of the alarm call 
of cheetal filled me with admiration and with envy, for though I 
could have competed with him on a single call I could not have 
rung the changes on the different ages of the deer he was 
imitating as quickly or as smoothly as he was doing. 

When taking up my position on the ground, I knew the leopard 
would see me the moment he returned to his kill, and I 
expected to get my picture while he was trying to take the kill 
away. After shaking off the drongo the leopard returned a 
second time and though, by growling fiercely, he showed his 
resentment at my presence and at the sound my camera made, 

I succeeded in exposing fifty feet of film— at a range of twenty 



yards— while he was struggling to break the creeper with 
which I had tied the kill to the stump. 

I do not know if racket-tailed drongos can learn to talk, but I do 
know that they can learn to whistle tunes. Some years ago the 
Anglo-Indian station-master of Mankapur Junction on the 
Bengal and North-Western Railway now the Oudh-Tirhut 
Railway supplemented his income by teaching drongos 
and shamas to whistle tunes. Trains halted at the junction for 
breakfast and lunch and it was a common sight to see 
passengers running over to the station-master's bungalow to 
hear his birds, and returning with a cage containing a bird that 
whistled the tune they fancied most. For these birds, plus an 
ornate cage, the station-master charged a flat rate of thirty 
rupees. 



Chapter Seven 

HAVING STATED THAT THE BOOK of Nature has no beginning 
and no end, I would be the last to claim that I have learned all 
that is to be learnt of any of the subjects dealt with in Jungle 
Lore, or that the book contains any expert knowledge. But 
having spent so much of my life with nature, and having made 
a hobby of jungle lore, I have observed a little knowledge, and 
that knowledge I am now imparting without reservations. I do 
not flatter myself that all who read these pages will agree with 
my deductions and statements, but that need be no cause for 
quarrel, for no two or more people look at any object with the 
same eyes. Take, for example, three people looking at a rose. 
One will see only the colour of the flower, another will see only 
the shape, while the third will see both the colour and the 
shape. All three will have seen what they were looking for, and 
all three will have been right. When the present Prime Minister 
of the United Provinces of India and I differed on a subject 
under discussion, he said, 'We can agree to differ on this point, 
and still remain friends. 1 So if any reader differs with me on 
any point I raise, let us take the Prime Minister's advice and 
remain friends. 

In the beginning I found it difficult to distinguish between the 
tracks of different animals that left more or less similar 
impressions on the bed of the watercourse. For instance, the 
tracks of a young sambhar and of a young blue-bull are very 
similar to the tracks of a big pig. But by watching each of these 
animals crossing the watercourse and then examining its tracks 
I soon found that I could, at a glance, distinguish between the 
tracks of a pig and the tracks of all the other cloven-hoofed 
animals in the jungle. A pig, like all deer, has rudimentary hoofs 
at the back of the main hoofs. In a pig these rudimentary hoofs 
are longer than they are in a deer, and except when a pig is 
crossing hard ground these rudimentary hoofs leave a distinct 
impression, whereas in the case of deer the rudimentary hoofs 
only leave an impression when the main hoofs have sunk in soft 
ground. Again, until one has gained some experience it is 



difficult to tell the difference between the pug marks of a tiger 
cub, and the pug marks of a leopard, when both are of the 
same superficial area. The difference between two pug marks 
can be determined by looking at the imprint of the toes, for the 
toes of a tiger cub are larger and out of all proportion to the 
toes of a leopard when both pug marks cover the same 
superficial area. 

The tracks of hyaenas and those of wild dogs are often 
confused with the tracks of leopards. Here— when there is any 
doubt— two fundamental rules can be applied to determine the 
species of the animal that has made the track: 

(a) All animals that run down their prey have big toes as 
compared with their pads, and all animals that stalk their prey 
have small toes as compared with their pads. 

(b) The imprint of the toe-nails shows in the tracks of all 
animals that run down their prey, and— except when startled, 
or when in the act of springing— the imprint of the claws does 
not show in the tracks of animals that stalk their prey. 

If you look at the tracks of a house dog and cat, you will see 
what I mean by big toes and small pads in the track of the 
former, and small toes and big pads in the track of the latter. 

When living in an area in which snakes are plentiful, it is 
advisable on occasion to know— from its tracks— in which 
direction the snake has gone and to determine, more or less 
accurately, if the snake was poisonous or nonpoisonous. The 
girth of a snake can also be assessed from its track. I will deal 
with these three points in the order in which I have mentioned 
them: 

(a) Direction: For the purpose of my illustration I should like 
you to imagine a field of closely-planted lucern, six inches high. 
If you were to run a roller across the field from right to left you 
would notice that the lucern plants were laid flat in the 
direction in which the roller had been run, so even if you had 
not been present when the roller was being run across the field 



you would have no difficulty in knowing that it had been run 
from right to left. If you are not blessed with good eyesight, 
take a magnifying glass and look carefully at any patch of sand 
or dust, and you will note that particles of the sand or dust 
stand up higher than other particles. Call these particles that 
stand upright the 'pile'. When a snake passes over sand or dust 
it lays the pile flat in the direction in which it has gone, in the 
same way as the roller did with the lucern. Every surface like 
sand, dust, ashes, and so on, on which a snake leaves a track, 
has a pile on it, and remembering this, you can always tell in 
which direction a snake has gone by looking at the flattened 
pile. 

(b) Poisonous or non-poisonous: You will note that I have said 
you can determine more or less accurately from the track of a 
snake whether it is poisonous or non-poisonous. There is no 
hard and fast rule— as in the case of direction— by which the 
species of a snake can be determined from its track. For though 
I have only seen the tracks of a few of the three hundred or 
more varieties of snakes in India, I know of two exceptions 
from the general rule I apply to determine the species from the 
track. The two exceptions are the hamadryad or king cobra in 
the case of poisonous snakes, and the python in the case of 
non-poisonous snakes. 

Poisonous snakes, with the exception I have mentioned, lie in 
wait for their victims or approach them unseen. They therefore 
have no need for speed and move over the ground 
comparatively slowly, and when a snake moves slowly it can 
only do so by excessive wriggling. Take for example a Russell's 
Viper, or a krait, India's most deadly snake. If you watch one of 
these snakes moving over the ground, say over sand or dust, 
you will note that it travels in a series of short curves, and if 
you examine the track left by the snake, you will observe that it 
shows as a series of short curves. When, therefore, you see the 
track of a snake that shows excessive wriggling, you can be 
reasonably sure it is the track of a poisonous snake. 
Hamadryads live almost exclusively on other snakes and as 



many of their intended victims can move with speed, the 
hamadryad has acquired a turn of speed which is said to equal 
that of a horse. On this point I am ignorant for I have never 
chased or been chased on horseback by this king of snakes, 
which attains a length of seventeen feet. However, having 
killed a few hamadryads up to fourteen feet in length, I know 
they can travel fast, and this turn of speed I believe they have 
acquired to enable them to catch other fast-moving snakes. 
Non-poisonous snakes, with the exception I have mentioned, 
are slim-built, active, and speedy; and some, like the dhamin or 
rat snake and the black rock snake, can cover the ground at 
incredible speed. Speed in non-poisonous snakes may be 
essential partly to secure their prey and partly to outstrip their 
enemies, of whom they have many. When a snake covers the 
ground at great speed it leaves a more or less straight track, 
and where there are slight inequalities in the ground the belly 
of the snake only touches the hills, and not the valleys. When, 
therefore, you see a track that is comparatively straight you 
can be reasonably sure it is the track of a non-poisonous snake. 
The only poisonous snake whose track you might confuse with 
that of a non-poisonous one is a hamadryad, but the chances of 
your doing so are small, for the hamadryad is rare and is found 
only in a few localities. 

(c) Girth: To estimate the girth of a snake from the track it 
makes, measure the width of the track at several points, and 
multiply the mean width by four. This will give the girth of the 
snake, though only approximately, for the width of the track 
will depend on the surface on which it is made. For instance, if 
the track is made on a light film of dust, it will be narrower 
than it would be if made on deep dust. 

In India twenty thousand people die each year of snake-bite. Of 
these twenty thousand, I believe only half die of snake poison; 
the other half die of shock or fright, or a combination of the 
two, from the bite of non-poisonous snakes. Though Indians 
have lived with snakes for thousands of years it is surprising 
how little they know about them, and with very few exceptions 



Indians look upon all snakes as poisonous. The shock of a bite 
from a big snake is considerable, and when in addition to the 
shock the victim jumps to the conclusion that he has been 
bitten by a poisonous snake and that he is doomed, it is not 
surprising that such a large number of people succumb— as I 
believe they do— to the bite of non-poisonous snakes. 

In most villages in India there are men who are credited with 
being able to cure people bitten by snakes. As only some ten 
per cent of the snakes in India are poisonous, these men build 
up a great reputation for themselves. They give their services 
free and do good work among the poor, for though they cannot 
with their nostrums and charms cure anyone who has received 
a lethal dose of snake poison, they do save the lives of many 
people bitten by non-poisonous snakes, by infusing them with 
courage and confidence. 

Most hospitals in India are equipped to deal with snake-bite 
victims, but as the poor have no means of transport other than 
their own legs or the shoulders of companions, in many cases 
they arrive at hospital when they have passed the stage at 
which expert medical treatment would be of benefit to them. In 
all hospitals charts are exhibited of poisonous snakes. Except 
where rewards are paid for the destruction of poisonous snakes 
these charts are of little value, for most people are bitten while 
moving about barefoot at night, and therefore do not see the 
snakes that have bitten them. And again, there is a widespread 
belief that if the person bitten kills the snake, the snake in turn 
will kill him, so few snakes are produced in hospitals by snake¬ 
bite victims to enable doctors to determine whether the patient 
was bitten by a poisonous or a non-poisonous species. 

My method— when I am in doubt— of determining whether a 
snake is poisonous or non-poisonous, is to kill it and look at its 
mouth. If it has two rows of teeth I class it as non-poisonous; 
while if it has two fangs on the upper jaw— hinged in the viper 
family and fixed in the cobra family— I class it as poisonous. A 
bite from the former class exhibits a number of teeth-marks; a 



bite from the latter class exhibits two fang-marks, though in 
some cases only one fang-mark, as happens occasionally when 
the striker is not at right angles to the object struck, or when 
the object struck, say a finger or a toe, is too small for both 
fangs to make contact. 



Chapter Eight 

LEARNING THE CALLS OF THE jungle folk was not difficult, 
nor was it difficult to imitate some of the birds and a few of the 
animals, for I had a good ear, and being young my lips and 
vocal chords were pliant. Learning the calls and being able to 
identify every bird and animal by its call was not sufficient, 
however, for, with the exception of those birds whose function 
it is to fill nature's garden with melody, birds and animals do 
not call without a reason, and the call differs according to the 
reason for which it is made. 

I was sitting one day on a tree watching a herd of cheetal in an 
open glade. There were fifteen stags and hinds in the herd, and 
five young ones all about the same age. One of the young ones 
that had been sleeping in the sun got to its feet, stretched 
itself, and kicking up its heels raced across the glade towards a 
fallen tree; this was a signal to the other young ones that a 
game of 'follow the leader 1 was on. Nose to tail the five cleared 
the tree, circled around, raced through the glade and again 
cleared the tree. After the second jump the leader carried on 
into the jungle beyond, followed by its companions. A hind that 
had bean lying down now got to her feet, looked in the 
direction in which the young ones had gone, and gave a sharp 
bark. The bark brought the truants racing back to the glade, 
but it had not the slightest effect on the grown animals, who 
continued to lie down or to crop the short grass. A footpath 
used by woodcutters passed within a short distance of the 
glade and presently along this path came a man carrying an 
axe over his shoulder. From my raised position I saw the man 
while he was still a long way off, for the jungle in the direction 
in which he was coming was comparatively open. When the 
man was a hundred yards from the glade one of the hinds saw 
him; gave a sharp bark and the whole herd without a moment's 
hesitation dashed away into thick cover. 

The bark of the anxious mother recalling her young one and the 
bark of the hind warning the herd of the presence of a human 



being had, to my untrained ears, sounded exactly alike and it 
was not until I had gained experience that I detected that the 
difference in the call of animals, and also of birds, when calling 
for different reasons was not to be found in the call itself, but in 
the intonation of the call. A dog barks, and all who hear it know 
it is barking to welcome its master; or barking with excitement 
at being taken for a run; or barking with frustration at a treed 
cat; or barking with anger at a stranger; or just barking 
because it is chained up. In all these cases it is the intonation 
of the bark that enables the hearer to determine why the dog is 
barking. 

When I had absorbed sufficient knowledge to enable me to 
identify all the jungle folk by their calls, ascribe a reason for 
the call, and imitate many of them sufficiently well to get some 
birds and a few animals to come to me or to follow me, the 
jungles took on an added interest, for not only was I able to 
take an interest in the surroundings within sight but also in the 
surroundings to the limit of my hearing. But first it was 
necessary to be able to locate, or pinpoint sound. Animals who 
live day and night with fear can pinpoint sound with exactitude, 
and fear can teach human beings to do the same. Sounds that 
are repeated— as, for instance, a langorbarking at a leopard, or 
a cheetal barking at a suspicious movement, or a peafowl 
calling at a tiger— are not difficult to locate, nor do they 
indicate immediate danger calling for instant action. It is the 
sound that is only heard once, like the snapping of a twig, a low 
growl, or the single warning call of bird or of animal, that is 
difficult to locate, is of immediate danger, and calls for instant 
action. Having acguired the ability— through fear— of being 
able to pinpoint sound, that is, to assess the exact direction and 
distance of all sounds heard, I was able to follow the movement 
of unseen leopards and tigers, whether when in the jungle by 
daylight, or in bed at night, for the situation of our home 
enabled me to hear all the jungle sounds. 

In return for the birds I collected for him, Stephen Dease gave 
me the gun I have already referred to. This gun was a double- 



barrelled muzzle-loader which in its young days must 
have been quite a good weapon, but whose efficiency had been 
reduced by half by an over-charge of powder which had split 
the right barrel. The explosion had also evidently broken the 
stock, and when Stephen passed the old warrior over to me the 
barrels and stock were held precariously together with 
lappings of brass wire. However, as Kunwar Singh— my 
poacher friend— pointed out to me, the left barrel was 
sound and capable of rendering good service; a prediction that 
proved correct for I kept the larder for a considerable family 
supplied for two winters with jungle-fowl and pea-fowl, and on 
one memorable occasion I crept up close enough to a cheetal to 
shoot it with No. 4 shot. 

I am not ashamed to admit that all the birds I shot with the 
muzzle-loader were shot sitting. Ammunition was not easy to 
come by and to eke out my scanty supply every shot had to be 
effective. If during a morning or an evening I fired two or three 
shots, I brought back two or three birds, and no other method 
of shooting the birds could possibly have given me more 
pleasure. 

I was returning one evening from the foothills at the upper end 
of the jungle between the two watercourses I have mentioned. 
The weather for several weeks had been very dry, making 
stalking difficult, and the sun was near setting when I turned 
my face for home, with a jungle-fowl and a kalege pheasant in 
the string bag in which I carried my powder and shot. A blue- 
black cloud was showing over a shoulder of the foothills to the 
west as I emerged from a deep ravine in which I had shot 
the kalege pheasant. This ominous-looking cloud, following a 
spell of dry weather and a sultry day when not a leaf or a blade 
of grass had stirred, presaged a hailstorm. Hailstorms along 
the foothills are feared by man and beast, for in a few minutes 
a belt ol cultivation, maybe only a quarter of a mile wide or 
maybe ten miles, can be laid waste and children and cattle 
killed if caught in the open. I have never seen a wild animal 
killed by hailstones, hut I have seen the jungle strewn with 



dead birds, including vultures and peafowl. 

I had three miles to go, but by taking a direct line for home and 
cutting the corners in the winding game-tracks I could reduce 
the distance by half a mile. I was now facing the oncoming 
blue-black cloud, across the face of which forked lightning was 
continuous. The birds and animals were silent and the only 
sound to be heard as I entered a thick belt of heavy timber was 
the distant rumble of thunder. Under the dense canopy of 
leaves the light was fading and as I loped along, taking care to 
see where I placed my feet for I was running barefoot, I heard 
the wind that always precedes a hailstorm. When I was half¬ 
way through the timber the wind struck the forest, sending the 
carpet of tinder-dry dead leaves swirling along the ground with 
the noise of a suddenly released torrent of water, and at the 
same moment I heard a scream— Dansay's 'banshee', without a 
doubt. Starting on a minor note the scream developed into a 
terrifying shriek, and then died away on a long-drawn-out 
sobbing note. Some sounds have the effect of petrifying one, 
others galvanize one into instant action: the scream— which I 
placed as being above and a little behind me— had the latter 
effect on me. A few weeks previously— in company with Magog 
— I had run from a tiger as I thought I should never run again, 
but I did not know then that terror of the unknown could lend 
wings to one's feet. To my credit be it noted that I did not throw 
away my gun and the heavy string bag, and regardless of 
thorns and of stubbed toes I ran until I reached home. Thunder 
was booming overhead and the first of the hailstones were 
hissing down as I ran up the steps of the veranda, and in the 
general confusion of fastening doors and windows and making 
all secure against the storm, my breathless and excited 
condition escaped attention. 

Dansay had said that hearing the banshee brought calamity to 
the hearer and his family, and fearing that I would be blamed 
for any calamity that befell the family, I said not a word about 
my experience. Danger of any kind has an attraction for 
everyone, including small boys, and though for many days I 



avoided the area in which I had heard the banshee, a day came 
when I found myself back at the edge of the heavy timber. As 
on the evening of the storm a wind was blowing, and after I had 
been standing with my back to a tree for some minutes, I again 
heard the scream. Restraining with difficulty my impulse to run 
away, I stood trembling behind the tree and after the scream 
had been repeated a few times, I decided to creep up and have 
a look at the banshee. No calamity had resulted from my 
hearing her and I thought that if by chance she saw me now, 
and saw that I was a very small boy, he would not kill me; so— 
with my heart beating in my throat— I crept forward as slowly 
and as noiselessly as a shadow, until I saw Dansay's banshee. 

In some violent storm of long ago a giant of the forest had been 
partly uprooted and had been prevented from crashing to the 
ground by falling across another and slightly smaller giant. The 
weight of the bigger tree had given the smaller tree a 
permanent bend, and when a gust of wind lifted the bigger one 
and then released it, it swayed back on to the supporting tree. 
At the point of impact the wood of both trees had died and 
worn as smooth as glass, and it was the friction between these 
two smooth surfaces that was emitting the terrifying scream. 
Not until I had laid the gun on the ground and climbed the 
leaning tree and sat on it while the scream was being repeated 
below me, was I satisfied that I had found the terror that was 
always at the back of my mind when I was alone in the jungles. 
From that day I date the desire I acquired of following up and 
getting to the bottom of every unusual thing I saw or heard in 
the jungles and for this I am grateful to Dansay for, by 
frightening me with his banshee, he started me on the 
compiling of many exciting and interesting jungle detective 
stories. 

Detective stories of fiction usually start with the evidence 
of some violent crime or attempted crime, and the enthralled 
reader— oblivious for the time being that he is reading fiction— 
is carried along through exciting scene after scene until finally 
the criminal is detected and made to suffer for his crime. My 



jungle detective stories do not start in the same way; nor do 
they always end with punishment for the criminal. I will select 
at random two of these stories from memory's library. 

( 1 ) 

I was camping at a Forest Department bungalow ten miles from 
Kaladhungi and had gone out early one morning to try to shoot 
a jungle-fowl or a peafowl for the pot. To the left of the road I 
was on was a densely-wooded low hill with game of all kinds on 
it, and to the right was cultivated land with a narrow strip of 
bush-covered ground between the cultivation and the road. 
When the village folk started moving about their fields in the 
morning, birds that were feeding on the crops rose and flew 
over the road, offering excellent shots. My luck was out that 
morning, for the birds that crossed the road were out of range 
of my small bore gun, and I got to the end of the cultivation 
without firing a shot. 

While keeping an eye open for birds, I had also kept an eye on 
the road, and a hundred yards from where the chances of my 
shooting a bird ended I noted that a big male leopard had come 
down the hill from my left on to the road. For a few yards the 
leopard had kept to the left of the road, then crossed to the 
right and lain down near a bush. From this point the leopard 
had gone forward for twenty yards, and again lain down by a 
bush. The behaviour of the leopard indicated that he had been 
interested in something, and quite evidently that something 
had not been on the road, for if it had he would have gone 
forward through the bushes and not along the road. Going back 
to where he had first lain I knelt down to see the view he had 
obtained from this spot. Where the cultivation and the narrow 
strip of bushes ended there was an open stretch of ground, the 
grass on which had been cropped close by village cattle. This 
stretch of ground was visible from the leopard's first viewpoint, 
and I found it was also visible from his second viewpoint, so 
what he had been interested in was evidendy on the open 
ground. 



Keeping under cover of the screen of bushes, the leopard had 
gone forward for another fifty yards to where the bushes ended 
and where a shallow depression starting at the edge of the 
road ran across the open ground. Where the bushes ended the 
leopard had lain down for some time, changing his position 
several times, and eventually he had entered the depression 
and proceeded along it, stopping and lying down frequendy. 
Thirty yards farther on the sand and dust that had been washed 
off the road into the depression ended and gave place to short 
grass. Here, from the particles of sand and dust adhering to the 
grass where the leopard had put his pads, it was reasonable to 
assume that he passed that way after the dew had started 
falling the previous evening, which would be at approximately 
7 p.m. The grass in the depression extended for only a few 
yards and the light sand and dust beyond showed no pug 
marks, so it was evident the leopard had left the depression at 
this spot. Tracking on the open ground was not possible, but 
from where the leopard had left the depression I saw he had 
gone in the direction of a few coarse tufts of grass, a foot or 
two high. Going up to the tufts, I saw at a distance of about ten 
feet the deep imprints of a sambhar's hoofs. From here on for 
thirty yards, and at regular intervals, all four hoofs of 
the sambhar hadbitten deep into the ground as would naturally 
happen if the sambhar was trying, by shock tactics, to dislodge 
something from his back. At the end of the thirty yards 
the sambhar had turned to the left and dashed straight towards 
an isolated tree on the far side of the depression. On the bark 
of this tree, and at a height of about four feet, I 
found sambhar hairs and a small splash of blood. 

I was now convinced that the leopard from his look-out on the 
hill had seen the sambhar feeding on the open ground, and 
after reconnoitring the position had set off to stalk it and, 
having sprung on its back from the cover of the tufts of grass, 
that he was now riding it until it took him to some sheltered 
spot where he could kill it and have the kill to himself. To have 
killed the sambhar where he caught it would have been easy 



but he could not have dragged a full-grown sambhar to cover— 
the hoof marks had shown me that the sambhar was full grown 
— and when daylight came he would have lost his kill, so he 
had wisely decided to ride it. Having failed to wipe the leopard 
off its back on the first tree the sambhar made three more 
attempts to get rid of his unwelcome rider before making for 
the main jungle two hundred yards away where he evidently 
hoped that bushes would accomplish what the trees had failed 
to do. Twenty yards inside the bushes, and well screened from 
the prying eyes of human beings and vultures, the leopard had 
buried his teeth in the oldsambhar hind's throat, and while 
holding on with his teeth and the claws of his fore-paws, had 
swung his body clear of the hind bringing her to the ground 
and, after killing her, had eaten his meal. The leopard was lying 
near his kill when I arrived and on seeing me moved off, but he 
had nothing to fear from me for I was out bird shooting and 
was armed with a 28-bore gun and No. 8 shot. 

I know of many instances of leopards riding animals 
they intend to kill— sambhar, cheetal, and in one instance a 
horse— but I only know of one instance of a tiger having done 
so. 

On that occasion I was camped near Mangolia Khatta, a 
cattle station twelve miles from Kaladhungi, and while I was 
having a late breakfast one morning I heard the distant boom 
of buffalo bells. Earlier in the morning, while returning to camp 
after taking a cinema picture of a leopard, I had passed 
through a herd of some hundred and fifty buffaloes that were 
grazing on a wide expanse of tarai grass through which ran a 
sandy nullah, with a trickle of water in it. In this nullah I had 
seen the fresh pug marks of a tiger and a tigress. From the 
violent booming of the bells it was evident that the herd of 
buffaloes was stampeding back to the cattle station, and 
mingled with the sound of the bells was the bellowing of a 
single buffalo. The men at the cattle station, some ten in 
number, had now taken alarm and started to shout and to beat 
tin cans, whereon the buffalo stopped bellowing but the herd 



continued to stampede until it reached the station. 

Shortly after all the noise had died down I heard two shots, and 
on going to the station to investigate I saw a young European 
with a gun in his hand and a ring of Indians standing round a 
buffalo that was stretched on the ground. The European told 
me that he was employed by the Indian Wood Products at 
Izatnagar and that he had been talking to the cattle men when 
they heard the distant booming of the buffalo bells. As the 
sound drew nearer they heard the bellowing of a buffalo and 
the angry roar of a tiger (I was farther away and so had not 
heard the tiger), and fearing that the tiger was coming to the 
station they had started shouting and beating tin cans. On the 
arrival of the herd one of the buffaloes was seen to be 
smothered in blood and on the cattle men saying that nothing 
could be done for it, he had asked for and obtained permission 
to shoot it and had put two bullets into its head to end its 
suffering. 

The buffalo the young man had shot was young and in perfect 
condition, and the cattle men were probably right when they 
informed me it was one of the best in the herd. I had never 
seen an animal in the condition it presented, so I examined it 
very thoroughly. 

On the buffalo's neck and throat there was not a single mark of 
tooth or claw, but on its back were fifty or more deep cuts 
made by a tiger's claws. Some of these claw marks had been 
made while the tiger was facing towards the buffalo's head, 
others had been made while it had been facing towards the 
buffalo's tail. While riding the maddened animal the tiger had 
torn off and eaten some five pounds of flesh from its withers, 
and some ten to fifteen pounds from its hind quarters. 

Going back to my camp I armed myself with a heavy rifle and 
went down the trail the buffaloes had made, and found that the 
stampede had started on the far side of the nullah in which I 
had seen the tiger's pug marks. But the grass here was 
unfortunately shoulder high, so I was not able to reconstruct 



the scene or to find any clue as to how the tiger came to be on 
the back of a buffalo it had no intention of killing, as was 
evident from the absence of marks on the buffalo's neck and 
throat. This failure to reconstruct the scene I greatly regret, for 
apart from its being the only occasion on which I have been at 
fault, I believe no other instance of a tiger riding an animal and 
having a meal while doing so has ever been known. 

The pug marks in the nullah showed that both tigers were full 
grown, so it was not a case of a young and inexperienced tiger 
trying its hand; and, further, no young tiger would have dared 
to approach a herd of buffaloes at ten o'clock in the morning, 
or, for the matter of that, at any hour. 

( 2 ) 

Evelyn Gill, son of my old friend Harry Gill, is one of the 
keenest butterfly collectors I know, and in a conversation I 
had with him while he was in Naini Tal on short leave 
I mentioned having seen on the Powalgarh road a butterfly with 
brilliant red spots on its upper wings. Evelyn said he had not 
seen a butterfly of this kind and he begged me to get him 
a specimen. 

Some months later I was camped at Sandni Gaga, three miles 
from Powalgarh, trying to get a cinema picture of cheetal stags 
fighting, for at that time it was not unusual to see several 
battles between rival stags taking place at the same time on 
the Sandni Gaga plain. One morning after an early breakfast I 
set out with my butterfly net to try to get the specimen I had 
promised Evelyn. A hundred yards from my tent there was a 
forest road connecting Kaladhungi with Powalgarh, and in a 
hollow a mile along this road where there was 
a sambhar wallow I hoped to get the butterfly. 

This forest road was little used by human beings and as there 
was an abundance of game in the forest through which it ran, 
an early morning walk along it was of great interest, for on the 
road, which was of hard clay with a light film of dust on it, was 



a record of all the animals that had used or crossed it during 
the night. When looking at tracks on a road or game path, with 
a trained eye, it is not necessary to stop at each track to 
determine the species, size, movement, and so on of the animal 
or animals that have made the track, for these details are 
subconsciously noted. For instance, the porcupine that had 
come out on to the road, a little beyond where I joined the road 
after leaving my camp, had evidently taken fright at something 
in the jungle on the right of the road and had scurried back. 

The reason for his fright was apparent a few yards farther on, 
where a bear had crossed the road from right to left. On 
entering the jungle on the left the bear had disturbed a 
sounder of pig and a small herd of cheetal, for they had dashed 
across the road into the jungle on the right. A little farther on, 
a sambhar stag had come out from the right and after browsing 
on a bush had walked along the road for fifty yards, rubbed his 
antlers against a young sapling, and then gone back into the 
jungle. Near this spot a four-horned antelope, with a fawn at 
foot, had come on the road. The fawn, whose hoof-prints were 
no bigger than the finger nails of a child, had skipped about the 
road until the mother had taken fright, and after dashing down 
the road for a few yards mother and fawn had gone into the 
jungle. Here there was a bend in the road, and at the bend 
were the footprints of a hyaena who had come as far as this, 
and then turned and gone back the way it had come. 

Reading the signs on the road and listening to the birds— 
Sandni Gaga in addition to being the most beautiful spot for a 
hundred miles round is noted for its bird life— I had covered 
half a mile when I came to a stretch of the road that had been 
cut out of the face of the hill. Here the surface was too hard to 
show normal tracks and I had gone a short distance along the 
road when my attention was arrested by an unusual mark. This 
was a little furrow three inches long and two inches deep 
where it started, and it was at right angles to the road. The 
furrow could have been made by a staff with an iron point, but 
no human being had been along the road for twenty-four hours 



and the furrow had been made within the past twelve hours. 
And again, if a human being had made it it would have been 
parallel with and not at right angles to the road, which at this 
point was fourteen feet wide with a more or less perpendicular 
bank some ten feet high on the right and a steep slope on the 
left. The earth thrown out of the furrow showed that the object 
that had made it had travelled from right to left. 

Having satisfied myself that the furrow had not been made by a 
human being, I came to the conclusion that the only other thing 
that could have made it was the pointed tip of a horn, either of 
a cheetal or of a youngsambhar. Had either of these deer 
jumped down the steep bank and made a bad landing, hard 
though the ground was the hoofs of the animal would have 
broken the surface and left a track, but there were no deer 
tracks anywhere near the furrow. The final conclusion that I 
arrived at, therefore— with the furrow as my only clue— was 
that it had been made by the horn of a dead deer, and made 
when a tiger had jumped down the bank with the deer in its 
mouth. That there were no drag marks on the road was not 
unusual, for whenever it is possible to do so both tigers and 
leopards when crossing a road with a kill lift the kill clear of 
the ground, and this I believe they do to avoid leaving a scent 
trail for bears, hyaenas, and jackals to follow. 

To test the accuracy of my deductions I crossed the road and 
looked down the hill on the left of the road. No drag marks 
were to be seen, but on a bush twenty feet down the hill and at 
a height of about four feet I saw something glistening on a leaf 
in the morning sun; on going down to investigate I found this 
was a big drop of blood, not yet quite dry. From here on, 
tracking was easy, and fifty yards farther down under the 
shelter of a small tree and surrounded by thick bushes I found 
the kill, a cheetal stag with horns that many a sportsman would 
have prized as a good trophy. The tiger was taking no chances 
of his kill— from which he had eaten both hind quarters- 
being found by bird or beast, for he had scratched together the 
dry leaves and twigs for a considerable distance round, and 



had heaped them on the kill. When a tiger does this it is an 
indication that he is not lying up nearby to keep an eye on the 
kill. 

I had been told by Fred Anderson and Huish Edye of a big tiger 
in this area which Mrs (now Lady) Anderson had christened the 
Bachelor of Powalgarh. I had long wished to see this famous 
tiger that all the sportsmen in the province were trying to bag, 
and which I knew lived in a deep ravine that started near 
the sambhar wallow I was making for. As there were no pug 
marks near the kill by which I could identify the tiger that had 
killed the cheetal, it occurred to me that it was just possible 
that the kill was the property of the Bachelor and, if so, that 
there was now a reasonable chance of my having a look at this 
tiger to see if he was as big as he was reputed to be. 

Starting from near the kill a narrow glade ran down to a small 
stream a hundred yards away. Beyond the stream was a 
dense patch of wild lime. If the Bachelor had not gone back to 
his ravine he would in all probability be lying up in this patch of 
cover, so I decided to try to get the tiger to return to his kill. 
Having come to this decision I went up towards the road and 
buried my white butterfly net under dead leaves. The glade at 
the upper end was about ten feet wide and the tree under 
which the kill was lying was about the same distance from the 
right-hand side of the glade. On the left-hand side, and nearly 
opposite the kill was the dead stump of a tree roofed over with 
creepers. First seeing that there were no holes in the dead 
stump to harbour snakes, I cleared away the dry leaves from 
the foot of the stump— to avoid sitting on scorpions— and then 
made myself comfortable with my back to the stump. From my 
seat I could see the kill, which was about thirty feet away, and I 
could also see down the glade to the stream, on the far side of 
which a troupe of red monkeys were feeding on the berries of 
a pipal tree. 

When my preparations were completed, I gave the call of a 
leopard. Leopards will— when it is safe for them to do so— eat 



a tiger's kill, and of this tigers are very resentful. If the tiger 
was within hearing distance, and if my imitation was 
sufficiently good to deceive him, I expected him to come up the 
glade, and after I had had a good look at him I intended letting 
him know I was there and then make my getaway The monkeys 
responded to my call by giving their alarm call, and three of 
them took up positions on a branch that jutted out from 
the pipal tree at right angles at a height of about forty feet 
above ground. The alarm call of the monkeys which, as they 
could not see me, only lasted for a minute or so was all to the 
good, for if the tiger was in the vicinity he would now be 
assured that a leopard was interfering with his kill. I kept my 
eye on the three monkeys, and presently I saw one of them turn 
round, peer into the jungle behind him, bob his head up and 
down several times, and then he gave an alarm call. A minute 
later the other two started calling and were followed by several 
others farther up the tree. The tiger was coming, and I greatly 
regretted not having my camera with me for he would make a 
grand picture, walking up the glade with the sun glinting on 
the water of the stream and the pipal tree with the excited 
monkeys on it in the background. 

As usually happens on these occasions, however, the tiger did 
not do what I expected. After a long pause, during which I had 
the uneasy feeling that the tiger was approaching his kill from 
behind me, I caught a fleeting glimpse of him as he sprang 
across the stream and disappeared into the thick jungle on the 
right-hand side of the glade. After reconnoitring the position 
from the bushes beyond the stream the tiger had evidently 
concluded that if he came up the glade the leopard would see 
him, so he had started out to stalk the kill where he evidently 
expected to find the leopard. As far as I was concerned there 
was no objection to his doing this, though it would mean his 
coming closer to me than I had intended letting him. 

The ground was carpeted with dry leaves, and the tiger 
accomplished his stalk without my hearing a sound. I next saw 
him as he was standing looking down at his kill but, to my great 



unease, I found I was not looking at the Bachelor, but at a big 
tigress. At the best of times a tigress's temper cannot be relied 
on, and this was not one of those 'best of times', for I was 
sitting too close to her kill for my comfort, and , further it was 
quite possible that she had cubs in the lime thicket, in which 
case she would resent my presence near her kill. However, if 
she went bark the way she had come all would be well, but the 
tigress did not do this. After satisfying herself that the leopard 
had not touched her kill, she walked out on to the glade, 
halving the distance between us. For a long minute she stood 
undecided, while I held my breath and closed my eyes until I 
was looking through a slit, and then she quietly walked down 
the glade, lay down at the stream, had a drink, and then sprang 
across the stream and disappeared into the thick cover. 

In both the incidents I have related in these stories I did not 
know, at the start, that a crime had been committed, and it is 
this uncertainty of not knowing what a small clue will lead up 
to that makes the compiling of jungle detective stories so 
interesting and so exciting. 

Few can compile a detective story of fiction, but all can compile 
jungle detective stories provided they have eyes to more than 
the road they walk on, and provided also that they do not start 
with the assumption that they know all, before in fact they 
know anything. 



Chapter Nine 

WHEN I WAS TEN YEARS of age I was considered old enough 
to join the school cadet company of the Naini Tal Volunteer 
Rifles. Volunteering was very popular and was taken very 
seriously in India in those days, and all able-bodied boys and 
men took pride and pleasure in joining the force. There were 
four cadet companies and one adult company in our battalion 
with a combined strength of 500 which, for a population of 
6,000, meant that every one in twelve was a volunteer. 

The Principal of our school of seventy boys was also captain of 
the school cadet company, which mustered fifty strong. The 
holder of these dual posts was an ex-army man and it was his 
burning, and very praiseworthy, ambition to have the best 
cadet company in the battalion and to satisfy this ambition we 
small boys suffered, and suffered greatly. Twice a week we 
drilled on the school playground, and once a week we drilled 
with the other four companies on the flats, an open stretch of 
ground at the upper end of the Naini Tal lake. 

Our captain never missed, nor did he ever overlook a fault, and 
all mistakes made on the drill grounds were atoned for after 
evening school. Taking up a position four feet from his target 
and wielding a four-foot-long cane, the captain was a 
marksman of repute who had earned for himself the tide of 
'Dead Eye Dick'. I do not know if he made private bets with 
himself, but we small boys laid wagers of marbles, tops, 
penknives, and even on occasions the biscuit that formed our 
breakfast, that nine times out of ten our captain could lay his 
cane along the most painful weal left on the hand by the 
previous day's or previous week's caning, and the boy— usually 
a newcomer— who betted against the odds always lost. The 
cadets of the other three companies hotly disputed our 
reputation of being the best drilled company but they did not 
dispute our claim of our being the best turned-out company. 
This claim was justified, for before being marched down to drill 
with the other companies we were subjected to an inspection 



that detected the minutest particle of dirt under a finger-nail, 
or speck of dust on the uniform. 

Our uniforms— passed down when grown out of— were of dark 
blue serge of a quality guaranteed to stand hard wear and to 
chafe every tender part of the skin they came in contact with, 
and, further, to show every speck of dust. Hot and uncommon 
as the uniform was it was surpassed in discomfort by the 
helmet that was worn with it. Made of some heavy compressed 
material, this instrument of torture was armed with a four-inch- 
long fluted metal spike, the threaded butt end of which 
projected down inside the helmet for an inch or more. To keep 
the threaded end from boring into the brain the inner band had 
to be lined with paper, and when the helmet had been fixed to 
the head like a vice it was held in that position by a heavy 
metal chin strap mounted on hard leather. After three hours in 
the hot sun few of us left the drill ground without a splitting 
headache which made repetition of lessons prepared the 
previous night difficult, with the result that the four-foot cane 
was used more freely on drill days than on any other. 

On one of our drill days on the flats the battalion was inspected 
by a visiting officer of senior rank. After an hour of musketry 
drill and marching and counter-marching, the battalion was 
marched up to the Suka Tal (dry lake) rifle range. Here the 
cadet companies were made to sit down on the hillside while 
the adult company demonstrated to the visiting officer their 
prowess with the 450 Martini rifle. The battalion prided itself 
on having some of the best rifle shots in India in its ranks, and 
this pride was reflected in every member of the force. The 
target, standing on a masonry platform, was made of heavy 
sheet-iron and the experts could tell from the ring of the bullet 
on the iron sheet ether it had struck the centre of the target or 
the edge of it. 

Each cadet company had its hero in the adult company, and 
adverse comments against the marksmanship of a selected 
hero would that morning have resulted in many sanguinary 



fights, had fighting in uniform not been frowned on. After the 
scores of the best shots had been announced, the cadets were 
ordered to fall in and march down from the five-hundred- to the 
two-hundred-yard range. Here four senior cadets were selected 
from each rompany and we juniors were ordered to pile arms 
and sit down behind the firing point. 

Inter-school competition in all forms of sport, and most of all on 
the rifle range, was very keen and every shot fired that 
morning by the four competing teams was eagerly watched and 
fiercely commented on by friend and foe alike. The scores ran 
close, for the best shots in each company had been selected by 
the respective company commanders, and there was great 
jubilation in our ranks when it was announced that our team 
had come out second in the competition and that we had been 
beaten by only one point by the school that had three times our 
membership. 

While we— the rank and file— were commenting on the 
achievements of the recent competitors, the Sergeant-Major 
was seen to detach himself from the group of officers and 
instructors standing at the firing point, and come towards us 
bellowing in a voice that it was claimed could be heard a mile 
away, 'Corbett, Cadet Corbett!' Heavens! What had I done now 
that merited punishment? True I had said that the last shot that 
had put the rival company one point ahead of us had been a 
fluke, and someone had offered to fight me, but there had been 
no fight for I did not even know who the challenger was, and 
here now was that awful Sergeant-Major again bellowing, 
'Corbett, Cadet Corbett!' 'Go on.' 'He's calling you.' ‘Hurry up 
or you'll catch it,' was being said on all sides of me; and at last, 
in a very weak voice, I answered 'Yes sir. 1 'Why didn't you 
answer? Where is your carbine? 

Fetch it at once,' were rapped out at me all in one breath. 

Dazed by these commands I stood undecided until a push from 
behind by a friendly hand and an urgent 'Go on you fool 1 set me 
off at a run for my carbine. 



On our arrival at the two-hundred-yard range those of us who 
were not competing had been made to pile arms, and my 
carbine had been used to lock one of the piles. In my effort now 
to release my carbine the whole pile of arms clattered to the 
ground and while I was trying to set the pile up again the 
Sergeant-Major yelled, 'Leave those carbines you have mucked 
up alone, and bring yours here. 1 'Shoulder arms, right turn, 
quick march' were the next orders I received. Feeling far worse 
than any lamb could possibly ever have felt I was led off to the 
firing point, the Sergeant-Major whispering over his shoulder 
as we started, 'Don't you dare disgrace me.' 

At the firing point the visiting officer asked if I was the 
youngest cadet in the battalion, and on being told that I was, 
he said he would like to see me fire a few rounds. The way in 
which this was said— and the kindly smile that went with it— 
gave me the feeling that of all the officers and instructors who 
were standing round, the visiting officer was the only one who 
realized how alone, and how nervous, a small boy suddenly 
called upon to perform before a large and imposing gathering 
can feel. 

The 450 Martini carbine the cadets were armed with had the 
most vicious kick of any small-arms weapon ever made, and the 
musketry course I had recendy been put through had left my 
shoulder— which was not padded with overmuch flesh— very 
tender and very painful, and the knowledge that it would now 
be subjected to further kicks added to my nervousness. 
However, I would have to go through with it now, and suffer for 
being the youngest cadet. So on the command of the Sergeant- 
Major I lay clown, picked up one of the five rounds that had 
been laid down for me, loaded the carbine and raising it very 
gently to my shoulder took what aim I could and pressed the 
trigger. No welcome ring came to my anxious ears from the 
iron target, only a dull thud, and then a quiet voice said, 'All 
right, Sergeant-Major, I will take over now,' and the visiting 
officer, in his spotless uniform, came and lay down beside me 
on the oily drugget. 'Let me have a look at your carbine,' he 



said, and when I passed it over to him a steady hand carefully 
adjusted the back-sight to two hundred yards, a detail I had 
omitted to attend to. The carbine was then handed hack to me 
with the injunction to take my time, and each of the following 
four shots brought a ring from the target. Patting me on the 
shoulder the visiting officer got to his feet and asked what 
score I had made and on being told that I had made ten, out of 
a possible twenty with the first shot a miss be said, 'Splendid. 
Very good shooting indeed, 1 and as he turned to speak to the 
officers and instructors I went back to my companions, walking 
on air. But my elation was short lived, for I was greeted with, 
'Rotten shot.' 'Disgraced the Company.' 'Could have done better 
with my eyes closed.' 'Crumbs, did you see that first shot, went 
and hit the hundred-yard firing point.' Boys are like that. They 
just speak their minds without any thought or intention of 
being cruel or unkind. 

The visiting officer who befriended me that day on the Suka Tal 
rifle range when I was feeling lonely and nervous, later became 
the nation's hero and ended his career as Field-Marshal Earl 
Roberts. When I have been tempted, as many times I have 
been, to hurry over a shot or over a decision, the memory of 
that quiet voice telling me to take my time has restrained me 
and I have never ceased being grateful to the great soldier who 
gave me that advice. 

The Sergeant-Major who for many years ruled the Naini Tal 
Volunteers with a rod of iron, was short and fat with a neck like 
a bull's and a heart of gold. After our last drill on the flats that 
term he asked me if I would like to have a rifle. Surprise and 
delight rendered me speechless; however, no reply appeared to 
be expected, and he went on to say, 'Come and see me before 
you leave for the holidays and I will give you a service rifle and 
all the ammunition you want, provided you promise to keep the 
rifle clean, and to return me the empties.' 

So that winter I went down to Kaladhungi armed with a rifle, 
and without any anxiety about ammunition. The rifle the good 



Sergeant-Major had selected for me was dead accurate, and 
though a 450 rifle firing a heavy bullet may not have been the 
best type of weapon for a boy to train on, it served my purpose. 
The bow and arrow had enabled me to penetrate farther into 
the jungles than the catapult, and the muzzle-loader had 
enabled me to penetrate farther than the bow and arrow; and 
now, armed with a rifle, the jungles were open to me to wander 
in wherever I chose to go. 

Fear stimulates the senses of animals, keeps them 'on their 
toes', and adds zest to the joy of life; fear can do the same for 
human beings. Fear had taught me to move noiselessly, to 
climb trees, to pin-point sound; and now, in order to penetrate 
into the deepest recesses of the jungle and enjoy the best in 
nature, it was essential to learn how to use my eyes, and how 
to use my rifle. 

A human being has a field of vision of 180 degrees, and when in 
a jungle in which all forms of life are to be met with, including 
poisonous snakes and animals that have been wounded by 
others, it is necessary to train the eyes to cover the entire field 
ol vision. Movements straight in front are easy to detect and 
easy to deal with, but movements at the edge of the field of 
vision are vague and indistinct and it is these vague and 
indistinct movements that can be most dangerous, and are 
most to be feared. Nothing in the jungle is deliberately 
aggressive, but circumstances may arise to make some 
creature so, and it is against the possibility of these chance 
happenings that the eye must be trained. On one occasion the 
darting in and out of the forked tongue of a cobra in a hollow 
tree, and on another occasion the moving of the tip of the tail 
of a wounded leopard lying behind a bush, warned me just in 
time that the cobra was on the point of striking and the leopard 
on the point of springing. On both these occasions I had been 
looking straight in front, and the movements had taken place at 
the extreme edge of my field of vision. 

The muzzle-loader had taught me to economize ammunition 



and now, when I had a rifle, I considered it wasteful to practise 
on a fixed target, so I practised on jungle-fowl and on peafowl, 
and I can recall only one instance of having spoilt a bird for the 
table. I never grudged the time spent, or the trouble taken, in 
stalking a bird and getting a shot, and when I attained 
sufficient accuracy with the rifle to place the heavy 450 bullet 
exactly where I wanted to, I gained confidence to hunt in those 
areas of the jungle into which I previously been too frightened 
to go. 

One of these areas, known to the family as the Farm Yard, was 
a dense patch of tree and scrub jungle several miles in extent, 
and reputed to be 'crawling' with jungle-fowl and tigers. 
Crawling was not an overstatement as far as the jungle-fowl 
were concerned, for nowhere have I seen these birds in greater 
numbers than in those days in the Farm Yard. The Kota- 
Kaladhungi road runs for a part of its length through the Farm 
Yard and it was on this road that the old dak runner, some 
years later, told mr he had seen the pug marks of the 'Bachelor 
of Powalgarh'. 

I had skirted round the Farm Yard in the bow-and-arrow and 
muzzle-loader days, but it was not until I was armed with the 
450 that I was able to muster sufficient courage to explore this 
dense tree and scrub jungle. Through the jungle ran a deep and 
narrow ravine, and up this ravine I was going one evening 
intent on shooting a bird for the pot, or a pig for our villagers, 
when I heard jungle-fowl scratching among the dead leaves in 
the jungle to my right. Climbing on to a rock in the ravine I sat 
down, and on cautiously raising my head above the bank saw 
some twenty to thirty jungle-fowl feeding towards me, led by an 
old cock in full plumage. Selecting the cock for my target, I was 
waiting with finger on trigger for his head to come in line with 
a tree— I never fired at a bird until I had a solid background 
for the bullet to go into— when I heard a heavy animal on the 
left of the ravine and on turning my head I saw a big leopard 
bounding down the hill straight towards me. The Kota road 
here ran across the hill, two hundred yards above me, and 



quite evidently the leopard had taken fright at something on 
the road and was now making for shelter as fast as he could go. 
The jungle-fowl had also seen the leopard and as they rose with 
a great flutter of wings, I slewed round on the rock to face the 
leopard. Failing in the general confusion to see my movement 
the leopard came straight on, pulling up when he arrived at the 
very edge of the ravine. 

The ravine here was about fifteen feet wide with steep banks 
twelve feet high on the left, and eight feet high on the right. 
Near the right bank, and two feet lower than it, was the rock 
on which I was sitting; the leopard was, therefore, a little 
above, and the width of the ravine from me. When he pulled up 
at the edge of the ravine he turned his head to look back the 
way he had come, thus giving me an opportunity of raising the 
rifle to my shoulder without the movement being seen by him. 
Taking careful aim at his chest I pressed the trigger just as 
he was turning his head to look in my direction. A cloud of 
smoke from the black-powder cartridge obscured my view and I 
only caught a fleeting glimpse of the leopard as he passed over 
my head and landed on the bank behind me, leaving splashes of 
blood on the rock on which I was sitting, and on my clothes. 

With perfect confidence in the rifle, and in my ability to put a 
bullet exactly where I wanted to, I had counted on killing the 
leopard outright and was gready disconcerted now to find that 
I had only wounded him. That the leopard was badly wounded I 
could see from the blood, but I lacked the experience to know— 
from the position of the wound, and the blood— whether the 
wound was likely to prove fatal or not. Fearing that if I did not 
follow him immediately he might get away into some 
inaccessible cave or thicket where it would be impossible for 
me to find him, I reloaded the rifle and stepping from my rock 
on to the bank, set off to follow the blood trail. 

For a hundred yards the ground was flat, with a few scattered 
trees and bushes, and beyond this it fell steeply away for fifty 
yards before again flattening out. On this steep hillside there 



were many bushes and big rocks, behind any one of which the 
leopard might have been sheltering. Moving with the utmost 
caution, and scanning every foot of ground, I had gone half-way 
down the hillside when from behind a rock, some twenty yards 
away, I saw the leopard's tail and one hind leg projecting. Not 
knowing whether the leopard was alive or dead I stood stock 
still until presently the leg was withdrawn, leaving only the tail 
visible. The leopard was alive and to get a shot at him I would 
have to move either to the right or to the left. Having already 
hit the leopard in the body, and not killed him, I now decided to 
try his head, so inch by inch I crept to the left until his head 
came into view. He was lying with his back to the rock, looking 
away from me. I had not made a sound but the leopard 
appeared to sense that I was near, and as he was turning his 
head to look at me I put a bullet into his ear. The range was 
short, and I had taken my time, and I knew now that the 
leopard was dead, so going up to him I caught him by the tail 
and pulled him away from the blood in which he was lying. 

It is not possible for me to describe my feelings as I stood 
looking down at my first leopard. My hands had been steady 
from the moment I first saw him bounding down the steep 
hillside and until I pulled him aside to prevent the blood from 
staining his skin. But now, not only my hands but my whole 
body was trembling: trembling with fear at the thought of what 
would have happened if, instead of landing on the bank behind 
me, the leopard had landed on my head. Trembling with joy at 
the beautiful animal I had shot, and trembling most of all with 
anticipation of the pleasure I would have in carrying the news 
of my great success to those at home who I knew would be as 
pleased and as proud of my achievement as I was. I could have 
screamed, shouted, danced, and sung, all at one and the same 
time. But I did none of these things, I only stood and trembled, 
for my feelings were too intense to be given expression in the 
jungle, and could only be relieved by being shared with others. 

I had no idea how heavy a leopard was, but I was determined to 
carry rmy leopard home; so, laying the rifle down, I ran back to 



the ravine where there was a bauhinia creeper, and stripping 
off sufficient of the inner bark to make a strong rope, I 
returned and tied the fore and the hind legs of the leopard 
together. Then squatting down I got the legs across my 
shoulders but found I could not stand up, so I dragged the 
leopard on to the rock and again tried and found I could not lift 
it. Realizing that the leopard would have to be left, I hastily 
broke some branches and, covering it up, set off on my three- 
mile run for home. There was great excitement and great 
rejoicing in the home when I arrived with the news that I had 
shot a leopard, and within a few minutes Maggie and I, 
accompanied by two hefty servants, were on our way to the 
Farm Yard to bring home my first leopard. 

It is fortunate that Providence does not exact retribution for 
the mistakes of beginners or my first encounter with a leopard 
would probably have been my last, for I made the mistake of 
shooting at that first leopard when it was above and within 
springing distance of me, without knowing where to hit it to kill 
it outright. My total bag of animals up to that date was 
one cheetal— shot with the muzzle-loader— and three pigs and 
onekakar, shot with the 450 rifle. The pigs and the kakar I 
killed stone dead, and I thought I could also kill the leopard 
stone dead by shooting it in the chest, and there I made my 
mistake. For I learnt subsequenUy that though a leopard can 
be killed stone dead, it is seldom possible to do this by shooting 
it in the chest. 

When a leopard receives a body wound that does not kill it 
outright or disable it, it springs wildly, and though leopards 
never attack deliberately immediately on being shot at, there 
is always a risk of their making accidental contact with the 
sportsman, especially when they are above and within 
springing distance, and this risk is increased when the 
wounded animal is not aware of the position of its assailant. 
That the leopard in his wild spring landed on the bank behind 
me and not on my head was my good fortune, for not knowing 
where I was he might have made accidental contact with me. 



which would have been just as unpleasant as a deliberate 
attack. 

As an example of how uncertain a chest shot is, I will relate 
another experience I had with a leopard I shot in the chest. 
Maggie and I were camped one winter at Mangolia Khatta, a 
cattle station to which the animals of our village were sent 
when grazing in the Kaladhungi jungles became scarce. One 
morning while we were having breakfast the barking of a herd 
of cheetal apprised me of the fact that one of their number had 
been killed by a leopard. I had gone to Mangolia Khatta to try 
to shoot a leopard that was taking toll of our cows, and as there 
appeared to be a chance of getting a shot at the leopard now, I 
left Maggie to finish her breakfast and, picking up a 275 rifle, 
set off to investigate. 

The deer were calling four hundred yards due west of us, but to 
get to them I had to make a detour to avoid an impenetrable 
canebrake and swampy ground. Approaching the calling 
animals from the south, with the wind in my face, I saw some 
fifty stags and hinds standing on an open patch of burnt ground 
and looking in the direction of the canebrake. On the 
swampy ground between the canebrake and the open ground 
there was a belt of grass some two hundred yards wide, and 
from the open ground, and at a distance of sixty yards from me, 
a leopard was attempting to drag a cheetal stag towards this 
belt of grass. It was not possible to approach any nearer to the 
leopard without being seen by the herd of cheetal, who would 
have warned the leopard of my presence, so I sat down and 
raising my rifle waited for the leopard to give me a shot. 

The stag was big and heavy and the leopard was having great 
difficulty in dragging it over the rough ground, and presently it 
released its hold and stood up facing me A leopard's white 
chest, flecked with black, is a perfect target for an accurate 
rifle at sixty yards, and when I pressed the trigger I knew I had 
put the bullet where I wanted to. On receiving my shot the 
leopard sprang high into the air, and landing on all fours. 



dashed into the belt of grass. Going to the spot where the 
leopard had been standing I saw a blood trail leading to the 
grass, which here was about waist-high. Breaking some 
branches off a nearby tree, I covered up the stag to prevent 
vultures getting at it, for the stag was in velvet and in prime 
condition and I knew our men would be glad to have it. 
Returning to camp I finished my breakfast and then, 
accompanied by four of our tenants, went back to recover the 
stag and to follow up the wounded leopard. As we approached 
the spot from where I had fired, one of the men touched me on 
the shoulder and pointed to our right front, where the burnt 
ground ended and the belt of grass began. After a little while I 
saw what he was pointing at. It was a leopard, two hundred 
and fifty yards away, standing near the edge of the belt of 
grass. 

Our tenants, when in camp with us stoutly refuse to accept any 
payment for their services, but when out in the jungles we 
compete among ourselves to see who will be the first to spot a 
shootable animal, and when Ilose they accept with great glee 
the rupee I pay as forfeit. When I had paid my forfeit to the two 
men who claimed to have seen the leopard at the same time, I 
told them to sit down for the leopard had now turned and was 
coming in our direction.Quite evidently this was the mate of the 
one I had wounded and, attracted to the spot as I had been, 
was coming to see what its mate had killed. A hundred yards 
from us a tongue of grass extended for a few yards on to the 
open ground, and on reaching this spot— from where the 
leopard could see the kill— it stopped for several minutes, 
offering me a shot at its chest, but as I already had one leopard 
with a chest wound on my hands I held my fire. 

The leopard was very suspicious of the branches I had heaped 
on the kill; however, after a careful look all round, it cautiously 
approached the kill and as it stood broadside on to me I put a 
bullet into it an inch or two behind the left shoulder. It fell at 
my shot and did not move again and on going up to it I found it 
was dead. Telling the men to tie it to the bamboo pole they had 



brought and carry it to camp and return for the stag, I set out 
on the very unpleasant task of following up a wounded leopard 
in waist-high grass. 

The unwritten law that a wounded animal must be recovered at 
all costs is accepted by all sportsmen and— where carnivora 
are concerned— each individual has his own method of 
accomplishing this end. Those who have the command of 
elephants find the task an easy one, but those like myself who 
shoot on foot have to learn by experience the best method of 
putting wounded carnivora out of their suffering, and avoiding 
injury while doing so. Burning a jungle to recover a wounded 
animal is, in my opinion, both cruel and wasteful, for if the 
animal is able to move the chances are that it will get away to 
die, maybe days or weeks later, and if it is too badly wounded 
to move there is a certainty of its being roasted alive. 

It is not possible to follow the blood trail of carnivora in high 
grass with any degree of safety, and the method I adopted on 
the occasions on which I retrieved wounded carnivora in 
grass was to ignore the blood trail and to proceed inch by inch 
in the direction in which theanimal had gone, hoping for the 
best while prepared for the worst. On hearing the slightest 
sound a wounded animal will either charge or betray its 
position by some movement. If a charge does not materialize 
and the looked-for movement is observed, a stone or a billet of 
wood, or even a hat, can be usefully used and the animal dealt 
with when it charges at the thrown object. This method can 
only be adopted when there is no wind to rustle the grass, and 
when the sportsman has had some experience of shooting in 
grass, for though wounded carnivora are very vocal when 
disturbed they keep close to the ground and seldom show 
themselves until the last moment. 

There was no wind of any account that day at Mangolia Khatta, 
and after leaving my men I followed the blood trail over the 
burnt ground to where it entered the grass. Satisfying myself 
that my rifle was loaded and that it was working smoothly I 



stepped very cautiously into the grass, and as I did so I heard a 
whistle behind me and on looking round saw my men 
beckoning to me. On my rejoining them they pointed to three 
bullet holes they had found in the dead leopard while tying it to 
the bamboo pole. One was the bullet hole behind the left 
shoulder that had killed the leopard; of the other two, one was 
in the centre of the chest, while the other— an exit hole— was 
two inches from the root of the tail. 

The leopard, I very greatly regret to say, had a reason for 
returning to its kill, and when I found what this reason was I 
consumed with remorse. Leopard cubs can fend for themselves 
at a very young age by catching small birds, rats, mice, and 
frogs, and I can only hope that the cubs of the gallant mother, 
who after being wounded, risked her life to procure food for 
her young, were old enough to fend for themselves, for all my 
efforts to find them failed. 

My statement that before entering the grass to follow up the 
wounded leopard, I satisfied myself that my rifle was loaded 
and working smoothly, will appear unusual to sportsmen in 
view of the fact that I had a minute previously walked up to a 
leopard I had just shot, and presumably I had not done so with 
an empty rifle without knowing whether the leopard was alive 
or dead. What necessity then was there for me to satisfy myself 
that my rifle was loaded? I will tell why I did so, not only on 
this occasion but on every occasion on which my life has 
depended on my rifle being loaded. Fortunately I learnt my 
lesson when I was comparatively young, and to this I attribute 
the fact that I have lived to tell the tale. 

Shortly after starting work at Mokameh Ghat, of which I told 
in My India, I invited two friends to shoot with me at 
Kaladhungi. Both men. Silver and Mann, had recently arrived 
in India and had never fired a shot in the jungles. The morning 
after their arrival I took them out, and two miles along the 
Haldwani road I heard a leopard killing a cheetal in the jungle 
to the right of the road. Knowing it would not be possible for 



my friends to stalk the leopard, I decided to put one of them up 
on a tree over the kill, and told them to draw lots. Silver was 
armed with a ?500 D.B. rifle which he had borrowed, while 
Mann was armed with a 400 S.B. black-powder rifle, also 
borrowed. I was armed with a .275 magazine rifle. As Silver 
was a little older, and better armed than Mann, Mann very 
sportingly declined to draw, and the three of us set off to find 
the kill. The cheetal, a fine stag, was still twitching when we 
found it, and selecting a tree for Silver to sit on I left Mann to 
help him up, while I moved the leopard away to prevent it 
seeing Silver climbing the tree. The leopard was very hungry 
and disinclined to move; however, by zigzagging in front of him 
I drove him away and then returned to the kill. Silver had never 
before climbed a tree and was looking very unhappy, and I am 
not sure that I cheered him by remarking that the leopard was 
a big male, and cautioning him to be very careful over his shot. 
Then telling him that he would only have to wait a matter of 
five minutes, I took Mann away. 

A hundred yards from the kill there was a fire track that met 
the Haldwani road at right angles. Going through the jungles to 
this track, Mann and I had only proceeded a short distance 
along it when Silver fired two shots in quick succession, and as 
we turned round to retrace our steps we saw the leopard 
dashing across the track. Silver did not know whether he had 
hit the leopard or not, but on going to the spot where Mann 
and I had seen it crossing the track we found a blood trail. 
Telling my companions to sit on the track and wait for me, I set 
off alone to deal with the leopard. There was nothing heroic in 
this, quite the contrary in fact, for when following wounded 
carnivore it is necessary to concentrate attention on the matter 
in hand and it is difficult to do this when accompanied by 
companions with fingers on the triggers of cocked rifles. When 
I had gone a short distance Silver came after me and offered to 
accompany me, and when I declined his offer he begged me to 
take his rifle, saying he would never forgive himself if the 
leopard attacked me and I was unable to defend myself with my 



light rifle. So, to please him, we exchanged rifles. As Silver 
walked back to the fire track I set off for the second time, but 
before doing so I uncocked his rifle and opened the breach 
sufficiently to see that there were two cartridges in the 
chambers. 

The ground for a hundred yards was comparatively open, and 
then the blood trail led into heavy cover. As I approached this 
cover I heard the leopard moving in front of me, and for a 
second I thought it was on the point of charging. The sound 
was not repeated, however, so very cautiously I entered the 
cover and twenty yards farther on found where the leopard had 
been lying, and from where he had got up when I heard him. It 
was now a case of moving step by step and I was thankful, 
when a hundred and fifty yards farther on, the trail led out on 
to more open ground. There I was able to move faster and I had 
covered another hundred yards when, on approaching a 
big haldu tree, I caught sight of the tip of the leopard's tail 
projecting from the right-hand side of the tree. Finding he was 
followed the leopard had quite evidently taken up what he 
considered would be the best position for his charge, and that 
he would charge I had no doubt whatever. 

Deciding it would be to my advantage to meet a head-on 
charge, I moved to the left of the tree. As the leopard's head 
came into view I saw he was lying flat down, facing me, with 
his chin resting on his outstretched paws. His eyes were open, 
and the tips of his ears and his whiskers were trembling. The 
leopard should have sprung at me the moment I appeared 
round the tree, and that he had not done so made me hold my 
fire, for it had not been my intention to blow his head off at a 
range of a few feet, but to put a bullet into his body and 
so avoid ruining Silver's trophy. As I continued to stare at him 
his eyes closed and I realized that he was dead, that in fact he 
had died as I was watching him. To make sure I was right I 
coughed and as there was no response, I picked up a stone and 
hit him on the head. 



Silver and Mann came up at my call and before handing 
Silver's rifle back to him I opened the breach and extracted the 
two brass cartridges, and, to my horror, found that both were 
empty Many sportsmen have suffered through pulling the 
triggers of empty rifles, and had I not been slowed down while 
following the blood trail through heavy cover, I would have 
added to the number. From the day I learnt my lesson, 
fortunately without injury to myself, I have never approached 
dangerous ground without satisfying myself that the weapon I 
am carrying is loaded. If I am carrying a double-barrelled rifle I 
change the cartridges from one chamber to the other, and if I 
am carrying a single-barrelled rifle I eject the cartridge, see 
that the bolt is working smoothly, and then replace the 
cartridge in the chamber. 



Chapter Ten 

KUNWAR SINGH, OF WHOM I wrote in My India, had a great 
aversion to shooting in the jungles near Kaladhungi, which he 
said were full of ground creepers which made it difficult to run 
away from zealous forest guards and angry tigers, and for this 
reason he confined all his poaching activities to the Garuppu 
jungles. Good woodsman and good shot though he was, and 
greatly as I admired him, Kunwar Singh was not a super¬ 
sportsman and this I attribute to the fact that the jungles in 
which he did his shooting were teeming with game. Knowing 
every game-path and every glade and open stretch of ground 
on which deer were to be found, his method of approach was to 
stride through the jungles without any attempt at silence, and 
If he disturbed the deer in one glade he would say it did not 
matter for there were sure to be more in the next glade. 
Nevertheless I learnt many things from Kunwar Singh for 
which I have never ceased to be grateful, and I am also grateful 
to him for having helped me to overcome some of my fears of 
the unknown. One of these fears concerned forest fires. Having 
heard of the danger of forest fires and seen the effect of them 
in our jungles, I carried the fear in the back of my mind that I 
would one day be caught by a forest fire and roasted alive, and 
it was Kunwar Singh who dispelled this fear. 

In village areas in the Kumaon foothills every one is interested 
in his neighbour's affairs or doings, and to people who never 
see a daily paper and whose lives are, more or less, 
circumscribed by the forest that surrounds their village or 
group of villages, every scrap of news is of interest and is 
eagerly passed on, losing nothing in repetition. It was not 
surprising, therefore, for Kunwar Singh to have heard about my 
shooting of the leopard in the Farm Yard almost before the 
animal had time to cool, and being the sportsman he was he 
lost no time in coming to congratulate me. He knew about the 
rifle the Sergeant-Major had lent me, but until I shot the 
leopard I do not think he had any faith in my ability to use it. 
Now, however, with this concrete evidence before him he 



evinced a great interest in me and in the rifle, and before he 
left me that day I had promised to meet him at 5 o'clock on the 
following morning at the fourth milestone on the Garuppu road. 

It was pitch dark when Maggie brewed a cup of tea for me, and 
with an hour in hand I set off to keep my appointment with 
Kunwar Singh. I had walked that lonely forest road on many 
occasions and the dark held no terror for me, and as I 
approached the fourth milestone I saw the glimmer of a fire 
under a tree by the side of the road. Kunwar Singh had arrived 
before me and as I sat down near his fire to warm my hands he 
said, 'Oh look, you have come away in such a hurry that you 
have forgotten to put on your trousers.' I tried, with little 
success, to convince Kunwar Singh that I had not forgotten to 
don my trousers but that I was wearing— for the first time— a 
new style of nether garment called shorts. For though he 
confined himself to saying that jangias (panties) were not 
suitable for the jungles, his look implied that I was indecently 
clothed and that he would be hanged if he would be seen with 
me in public. After this bad start the atmosphere did not clear 
until a jungle-cock started crowing in a near-by tree, on 
hearing which Kunwar Singh got to his feet, put out the fire, 
and said it was time to be going for we still had a long way to 
go. 

The jungle was awakening as we left our tree and stepped out 
on the road. The jungle-cock who, awakened by our fire, 
had crowed his welcome to the coming day had set a sound 
wave in motion and each bird, big and small, as it roused from 
slumber added its voice to the growing volume of sound. 
Though our jungle-cock is the first bird to rub the sleep from 
his eyes, he is not the first to descend to the ground. The 
privilege of catching the early worm is claimed by the 
Himalayan whistling-thrush, better known as the whistling- 
schoolboy. While walking through the Kumaon jungles in the 
half-light between day and night, or night and day, a bird will 
flit by on silent wings pouring out a stream of golden song 
which once heard will never be forgotten. The songster is the 



whistling schoolboy bidding the closing day good night, or 
welcoming the new-born day Morning and evening he pours 
out his song while in flight, and during the day he sits for hours 
in a leafy tree whistling in a soft sweet minor key a song that 
has no beginning and no end. Next to greet the coming light is 
the racket-tailed drongo and a minute later he is followed by 
the peafowl. No one may sleep after the peafowl has given his 
piercing call from the topmost branch of the giant samal tree 
and now, as night dies and daylight comes, a thousand 
throbbing throats in nature's orchestra fill the jungle with an 
ever-growing volume of melody. 

And not only the birds, but the animals also, are on the move. A 
small herd of cheetal has crossed the road in front of us, and 
two hundred yards farther on a sambhar hind and her young 
one are cropping the short grass by the side of the road. A tiger 
now calls to the east and all the peafowl within hearing 
distance scream in unison. Kunwar Singh is of opinion that the 
tiger is the flight of four bullets from us, and that it is in the 
sandy nullah in which he and Har Singh met with their 
experience which so nearly had a fatal ending. The tiger quite 
evidently is returning home from a kill and is indifferent as to 
who sees him. First a kakar, then twosambhar, and now a herd 
of cheetal are warning the jungle folk of his presence. We reach 
Garuppu as the sun is touching the treetops, and crossing the 
wooden bridge and disturbing fifty or more jungle-fowl that are 
feeding on the open ground near the ruined staging buildings 
we take a footpath which leads us through a narrow belt of 
scrub jungle to the bed of the dry watercourse spanned by the 
bridge we have just crossed. This watercourse, which is dry 
except in the heavy monsoon rains, is a highway for all the 
animals that quench their thirst at the crystal clear spring 
which rises in its bed three miles farther down. In later years 
the watercourse became one of my favourite hunting grounds 
for rifle and camera, for it ran through country which 
abounded with game, and a human track on its sandy bed was 
as much a matter for speculation as Friday's footprint on 



Crusoe's island. 


For half a mile the watercourse runs through scrub jungle 
before entering a strip of nal grass a quarter of a mile wide and 
many miles long. Nal grass is hollow, jointed like bamboo, 
grows to a height of fourteen feet, and when accessible to 
villages is extensively used for hut building. When the jungles 
round Garuppu are burnt by our villagers, to get grazing for 
their cattle, all the game in the vicinity take shelter in 
the nal grass which, because it grows on damp ground, 
remains green all the year round. During exceptionally dry 
years, however, the nal grass occasionally catches fire, and 
when this happens a terrifying conflagration results, for the 
grass is matted together with creepers and each joint of 
the nal, as it heats up bursts with a report resembling a pistol 
shot, and when millions of joints are exploding at the same time 
the resulting noise is deafening and can be heard for a mile or 
more. 

As Kunwar Singh and I walked down the watercourse that 
morning I could see a black cloud of smoke rising high into the 
sky, and presently the distant roar and crackle of a great fire 
came to my ears. The watercourse here ran due south and the 
fire, whuh was on the eastern or left bank, was being driven 
towards it by a strong wind. Kunwar Singh was leading and, 
remarking over his shoulder that the nal was burning for the 
first time in ten years, he kept straight on, and on turning a 
corner we came in sight of the fire, which was about a hundred 
yards from the watercourse. Great sheets of flame were curling 
up into the cloud of black smoke on the edge of which 
hundreds of starlings, minas, rollers, and drongos were feeding 
on the winged insects that were being caught up by the hot 
current of air and whirled high into the sky. Many of the insects 
that escaped capture by the birds in the air were landing on 
the sandy bed of the watercourse where they were being 
pounced on by peafowl, jungle-fowl, and black partridge. 

Among these game-birds a herd of some twenty cheetal were 
picking up the big red fleshy flowers the high wind was 



dislodging from a giant samal tree. 

This was the first forest fire I had ever seen, and I attribute the 
fear it engendered in me to the fact that most human beings 
are frightened of the unknown. And then, on rounding the 
corner and coming in sight of the birds and the animals that 
were unconcernedly feeding in the vicinity of the fire, I realized 
that I alone was terrified and that there was no reason, other 
than ignorance, for my being so. Coming down the watercourse 
in the wake of Kunwar Singh I had been tempted to turn and 
run away, and had only been restrained from doing so by the 
fear of being thought a coward by Kunwar Singh. Now, 
standing on the sandy bed of the fifty-yard-wide watercourse 
with the roar of the approaching fire growing louder and 
louder while black clouds of smoke billowed overhead- 
waiting for a shootable animal to be driven out of the 
narrowing belt of nal grass— my terror left me, never to return. 
The heat from the fire could now be felt in the watercourse, 
and as the deer, peafowl, jungle-fowl, and black partridge 
climbed the right bank and disappeared into the jungle, we 
turned and retraced our steps to Garuppu and made for home. 

In later years grass-fires provided me with many exciting 
experiences. Before relating one of these it is necessary for me 
to state that we who cultivate land at the foot of the Himalayas 
are permitted, by Government, to burn the grass in 
unprotected forests to get grazing for our cattle. There are 
several varieties of grass in these forests and as they do not all 
dry off at the same time the burning is staggered and, starting 
in February, ends in June. Throughout this period fires can be 
seen on the grasslands and anyone passing a patch of grass 
that he considers is dry enough to burn, is at liberty to put a 
match to it. 

I had been shooting black partridge with Wyndham at 
Bindukhera in the Tarai, and early one morning Bahadur— an 
old friend who for thirty years has been headman of our village 
— and I set out on our twenty-five-mile walk to our home at 



Kaladhungi. We had covered about ten miles over ground on 
which most of the grass had been burnt but where there were 
still a few isolated patches of unburnt grass when, as we 
approached one of these patches, an animal came out on the 
cart track we were on, and for a long minute stood broadside 
on to us. The morning sun was shining on it and from its 
colouring and size we look it to be a tiger. When, however, it 
crossed the cart track and entered the grass we saw from the 
length of its tail that it was a leopard. 'Sahib, 1 said Bahadur 
regretfully, 'it is a pity that the Commissioner Sahib and his 
elephants are ten miles away, for that is the biggest leopard in 
the Tarai, and it is worth shooting. 1 That the leopard was worth 
shooting there was no question, and even though Wyndham 
and his elephants were ten miles away, I decided to have a try, 
for the leopard had come from the direction of a cattle station, 
and the fact that he was moving about in the open at that hour 
of the day was proof that he was coming from a kill he had 
made overnight at this station. When I outlined my plan— to 
burn the leopard out— to Bahadur, he experssed his willingness 
to help, but was doubtful of its success. The first thing to do 
was to find out how big the patch of grass was, so leaving the 
cart track we circled round it and found it was some ten acres 
in extent and cone shaped, with the cart track running along 
the base. 

The wind was right for my plan, so going to the farthest point 
of the grass, which was about two hundred yards from the cart 
track, I cut two tufts of grass and lighting them sent Bahadur 
to set fire to the grass on the right, while I set fire to it on the 
left. It was of the variety known as elephant grass, some twelve 
feet in height, and as dry as tinder, and within a minute of our 
setting it alight it was burning fiercely. Running back to the 
cart track I lay down on it and putting my rifle, a .275 Rigby, to 
my shoulder I took a sight along the outer edge of the track at 
a height that would put my bullet in the leopard's body when 
he tried to dash across it. I was lying ten yards from the grass, 
and the point where the leopard had entered it was fifty yards 



from me. The track was ten feet wide and my only hope of 
hitting the leopard was to press the trigger the moment I 
caught sight of him, for I was convinced he would cross the 
track at the last moment, and cross it at speed. There was no 
possibility of injury to Bahadur for I had instructed him to 
climb a tree, well clear of the track, after he had set a short 
stretch of the grass on fire. 

Half the grass had been burnt and the roar from the fire was 
like an express train going over a trestle bridge, when I saw a 
bare human foot near my right shoulder. On looking up I found 
a man standing near me who, from his appearance and dress, I 
knew was I Mahommedan cartman probably out looking for a 
lost bullock. Reaching up I pulled the man down and yelled into 
his ear to lie still beside me, and to ensure his doing so I threw 
a leg across him. On came the fire and when only some twenty- 
five yards of grass remained to be burnt the leopard streaked 
across the track and as I pressed the trigger I saw its tail go 
up. The grass on the left-hand side of the track had been burnt 
some days previously, and the forest of burnt stalks into which 
the leopard had disappeared made it impossible for me to see 
what the result of my shot had been. Reassured, however, by 
the way the leopard's tail had gone up that he was fatally 
wounded, I sprang up, took a firm grip of the man's hand, 
jerked him to his feet, and ran with him down the cart track 
through a dense cloud of smoke with the flames of the 
oncoming fire curling dangerously over our heads. Not until we 
were right over him did we see the leopard, and without losing 
a moment— for the heat here was terrific— I stooped down and 
putting the man's hand on the leopard's tail closed my hand 
over his and as we pulled the leopard round to drag it away 
from the fire the animal, to my horror, opened its mouth and 
snarled at us. Fortunately for us my bullet had gone through its 
neck and paralysed it, and by the time we had dragged it fifty 
yards to safety it was dead. As I released my hold on the man's 
hand he sprang away from me as though I had bitten him, and 
grabbing the pugree off his head ran with it trailing behind him 



as no cartman had ever run before. 


I regret I was not present when my friend arrived at whatever 
destination he was making for. Indians are past masters at 
recounting tales, and my friend's tale of his escape from the 
clutches of a mad Englishman would have been worth listening 
to. Bahadur had witnessed the whole occurrence from his 
perch on the tree and when he rejoined me he said. That man 
will be very popular at camp-fires for many years to come, but 
no one will believe his story. 1 

When conditions are not favourable for walking up so-called 
dangerous animals and shooting them on foot, the method most 
generally employed is to beat them out of cover with the help 
of elephants or men, or a combination of the two. Three of 
these beats stand out in my memory as being worthy of record, 
if for no other reason than that two were carried out with the 
minimum of manpower, while the third provided me with an 
experience that makes my heart miss a beat or two every time I 
think of it. 

First Beat 

Robin— our springer spaniel— and I were out for a walk one 
morning on the fire track half a mile to the west of the Boar 
bridge. Robin was leading, and on coming to a spot where 
there was short grass on the little-used track he stopped, smelt 
the grass, and then turned his head and looked at me. On going 
up to him I could see no tracks, so I signalled to him to follow 
the scent he had found. Very deliberately he turned to the left 
and, on reaching the edge of the track, ran his nose up and 
down a blade of grass and then with a quick glance round at 
me, as if to say, 'It's all right, I was not mistaken', stepped into 
the grass which here was about eighteen inches high. Foot by 
foot he followed the scent and a hundred yards farther on, 
where there was a little depression with damp earth in it, I saw 
he was trailing a tiger. On the far side of the depression Robin 
intently examined a blade of grass, and on stooping down I saw 
he had found a spot of blood. From experiences I have had with 



animals lelt wounded in the jungles by others I am very 
suspicious of any blood I find on a tiger track. However, on this 
occasion it was all right for the blood was quite fresh, and no 
shots had been fired in this direction that morning, so I 
concluded the tiger was carrying a kill, possibly a cheetal, or 
maybe a big pig. A few yards farther on there was a dense 
patch of clerodendron some fifty yards square, on reaching 
which Robin stopped and looked round at me for further 
instructions. 

I recognized the tiger from his pug marks on the damp earth. 
He was a big tiger who had taken up his residence in the heavy 
scrub jungle on the far side of the Boar river and who, since 
our descent from the hills three months previously, had given 
me a lot of anxiety. The two roads and the fire track on which 
Maggie and I were accustomed to take our morning and 
evening walks ran through this jungle, and on several 
occasions when I was away from home Maggie and Robin had 
encountered the tiger while out for a walk. On each succeeding 
occasion the tiger had shown less inclination to give way to 
them and the stage had been reached when Robin no longer 
considered it was safe for Maggie to walk on these roads, and 
flatly refused to accompany her beyond the bridge. Fearing 
that some day there might be an accident I had decided to take 
the first opportunity that offered to shoot the tiger, and now- 
provided the tiger was lying up with his kill in the patch of 
clerodendron— the opportunity I had been waiting for had 
come. Robin had trailed the tiger down wind, so making a wide 
detour I approached the clerodendron from the opposite side. 
When we were thirty yards away Robin halted, raised his head 
into the wind, jerked his muzzle up and down a few times, and 
then looked round at me. Good enough. The tiger was there all 
right, so we regained the fire track and made for home. 

After breakfast I sent for Bahadur, told him about the tiger, and 
asked him to fetch two of our tenants, Dhanban and 
Dharmanand, both of whom could be relied on to carry out 
instructions, and both of whom were as expert at tree climbing 



as Bahadur and myself. By midday the three men had eaten 
their food and forgathered at our cottage, and after seeing that 
they had nothing in their pockets that would rattle I made them 
remove their shoes and arming myself with a 450/400 rifle, we 
set off. On the way I outlined my plans for the beat I intended 
the three men to carry out. The men knew the jungle as well as 
I did and when I told them where the tiger was lying up, and 
what I wanted them to do, they were full of enthusiasm. My 
plan was to put the men up on trees on three sides of the patch 
of clerodendron, to stir the tiger up while I guarded the fourth 
side. Bahadur was to be on the central tree and on receiving a 
signal from me, which would be the call of a leopard, he was to 
tap a branch and if the tiger tried to break out on either side 
the man nearest to it was to clap his hands. The essence of the 
whole enterprise was silence, for the three men would be 
within thirty or forty yards of the tiger and the slightest sound 
while approaching their trees, climbing them, or while waiting 
for my signal, would ruin the plan. 

On reaching the spot where Robin had picked up the tiger's 
scent I made Dhanban and Dharmanand sit down, while I took 
Bahadur and put him up a tree twenty yards from the 
clerodendron, and opposite where I intended taking my stand. 
Then one by one I took the other two men and put them up in 
trees to Bahadur's right and left. All three men were in sight of 
each odier, and all three overlooked the patch of clerodendron 
and would, therefore, be able to see any movement the tiger 
made, but they would be screened from me by a belt of trees 
After the last man was safely on his tree, without a sound 
having been made, I went back to the fire track and going a 
hundred yards up it met— at right angles— another fire track 
that skirted the foot of a long low hill. This second fire track 
bordered the patch of clerodendron on its fourth side. Opposite 
the tree on which Bahadur was sitting, a narrow and shallow 
ravine ran up the side of the hill. The ravine was much used by 
game and I felt sure the tiger on being disturbed would make 
for it. On the right-hand side of the ravine, and ten yards up the 



hill, there was abig jamun tree. When planning the beat I had 
intended sitting on this tree and shooting the tiger as he went 
up the ravine past me. But now, on reaching the tree, I found I 
could not climb it with the heavy rifle in my hands and as there 
were no other trees nearby I decided to sit on the ground. So, 
clearing the dry leaves from the root, I sat down with my back 
to the tree. 

I had two reasons for giving the call of a leopard. One, a signal 
to Bahadur to start tapping a branch with the dry stick I had 
left with him: the other, to reassure the tiger that it was safe 
for him to cross the fire track, and to disarm any suspicion he 
may have had that he was being driven towards danger. When I 
was comfortably seated on the ground I pushed up the safety 
catch and putting the rifle to my shoulder, gave the call of a 
leopard. A few seconds later Bahadur started tapping with his 
stick and he had only tapped a few times when the bushes 
parted and a magnificent tiger stepped out on the fire track 
and came to a stand. For ten years I had been trying to get a 
cine-photograph of a tiger, and though I had seen tigers on 
many occasions I had not succeeded in getting one satisfactory 
picture. And now out in the open, twenty yards from me with 
not a leaf nor a blade of grass between us, and the sun shining 
on his beautifully marked winter coat, was a tiger that I would 
have gone anywhere and given anything to photograph. I have 
on occasio ns stalked an animal, maybe for hours or maybe for 
days, and on getting up to it raised my rifle and after taking 
careful aim lowered it, and then attracting the animal's 
attention flourished my hat, giving myself the pleasure of 
seeing it bound away unhurt. I would very gladly have treated 
this tiger in the same way, but I did not feel that I would be 
justified in doing so. Apart from consideration of Maggie, Sher 
Singh and other small boys grazed their cattle in this jungle, 
and the women and children of the village collected dry sticks 
in it, and though the tiger had not harmed man or beast his 
method of demonstrating was very terrifying and might easily 
result in an accident. 



After stepping out on the fire track the tiger stood for a minute 
or two looking to his right and to his left, and over his shoulder 
in the direction of Bahadur. Then very leisurely he crossed the 
track and started up the hill on the left-hand side of the ravine. 
My sights had been on him from the time his head parted the 
clerodendron bushes, and when he was level with me I pressed 
the trigger. I do not think he so much as heard my shot, and as 
his legs folded up under him he slid backwards and came to 
rest near my feet. 

Beat No. 2 

When His Highness the Maharaja of Jind died— full of years 
and loved by all who knew him— India lost one of her finest 
sportsmen. Ruler of a territory of 1,299 square miles with a 
population of 324,700 and a princely rent-roll, the Maharaja 
was one of the most unassuming men it has been my good 
fortune to meet. His hobbies were training gun-dogs and tiger 
shooting, and at both these sports he had few equals. When I 
firist knew him he had four hundred dogs in his kennels and to 
see him schooling young dogs, and later handling them in the 
field, was a lesson in patience and gentleness that I never tired 
of watching. Only once did I ever hear the Maharaja raise his 
voice, or use a whip, to a dog. At dinner that night when the 
Maharani asked if the dogs had behaved themselves the 
Maharaja said, 'No, Sandy was very disobedient and I had to 
give him a good thrashing. 1 

The Maharaja and I had been out bird shooting that day. A long 
strip of grass and bush jungle was being beaten towards us by 
a line of elephants and men. At the end of the strip was an open 
stretch of ground some fifty yards wide. The Maharaja and I 
were standing a few yards apart at the farther edge of the open 
ground, with short grass behind us. Sitting in a row to the 
Maharaja's left were three young Labradors, Sandy golden 
coloured, the other two black. The line put up a black partridge 
and the Maharaja dropped it on the open ground and sent one 
of the black dogs to retrieve it. Next a jungle-fowl came low 



over my head and I dropped it in the grass behind me. The 
second black dog retrieved this bird. Some peafowl now got up, 
but having heard the shots in front, broke away to the left and 
passed out of range. A hare then broke cover and checking at 
the Maharaja, who had turned round to speak to a servant 
behind him, turned at right angles and passed in front of me. 
Waiting until it was at extreme range— for it is not advisable to 
break game more than can be helped when young dogs are in 
the field— I fired, and the hare turned about and passing in 
front of both of us collapsed thirty yards to the right of 
the Maharaja. As it went over Sandy shot forward. 

'Sandy,Sandy/ shouted the Maharaja, but Sandy was listening 
to no one. His two companions had retrieved their birds and it 
was his turn now and nothing was going to stop him. In his 
stride he picked up the hare and racing back handed it to me. 
Returning to his master Sandy sat down in his allotted place, 
and was ordered to fetch the hare. Picking it up from where I 
had laid it down he trotted towards the Maharaja with it held 
high, and was waved away, farther, farther, to the right, 
still farther, until he reached the spot from where he had 
originally retrieved it. Here he was told to drop it and signalled 
to return. With drooping tail and hanging ears Sandy returned 
to his master a second time, and one of the other dogs was sent 
out to bring in the hare. When this had been done the Maharaja 
handed his gun to his servant, and taking a whip from him, 
caught Sandy by the scruff of his neck and gave him 'a good 
thrashing 1 . And a good thrashing it was but not for Sandy, for 
he was not touched, but for the ground on either side of him. 
When the Maharaja told his wife of Sandy's delinquency and 
the chastisement he had administered, I took a tablet from an 
attendant behind me— for the Maharaja was afflicted with total 
deafness— and wrote on it, 'Though Sandy Bahadur disobeyed 
you today he is the best dog in India, and will win the 
championship at the next gun-dog trials.' Later that year I 
received a telegram from the Maharaja which read, 'You were 
quite right. Sandy has won the Open Championship. 1 



The days were lengthening and the sun was getting hot, so 
making a very early start one morning I walked ten miles and 
arrived at the Maharaja's camp at Mohan as the family were 
sitting down to breakfast. 'You have come at a very opportune 
time,' said the Maharaja as I took a seat at his table, 'for today 
we are going to beat for the old tiger that has eluded us for 
three years. 1 I had heard this tiger discussed on many 
occasions and knew how keen the Maharaja was to outwit and 
shoot it. When,therefore, he offered me the best of the 
three machans that had been put up for the beat, and the loan 
of a rifle, I declined his offer and said I would prefer to be a 
spectator. At ten o'clock the Maharaja and Maharani, their two 
daughters and a girl friend and I motored down the road up 
which I had walked earlier that morning, to where the beat was 
waiting for us. 

The ground to be beaten was a valley running deep into the 
foothills, with a small stream winding through it, and flanked 
on either side by hills three hundred feet high. At its lower end, 
where the road crossed it, the valley was about fifty yards 
wide, and half a mile farther up it again narrowed to fifty yards. 
Between these two points the valley widened out to three or 
four hundred yards and here, where there was a dense patch of 
cover several hundred acres in extent, the tiger was thought to 
be lying up with the buffalo he had killed the previous night. At 
the upper end of the valley a small spur ran down from the hill 
on the right, and on a tree on this spur, a machan had been 
built which commanded the valley and the lower slopes of the 
hills on either side. Beyond the spur and on the far side of the 
stream, which here turned at right angles, two 
othermachans had been put up on trees thirty yards apart. 

Leaving our cars on the road we proceeded up the valley on 
foot, and guided by the head shikari and the secretary in 
charge of the beat, skirted to the left of the cover in which the 
tiger was said to be lying. When the Maharaja and his gun- 
bearer had taken their seats on the machan on the spur, the 
four ladies and I crossed the stream and occupied the 



two machans on the far side of it. The head shikari and the 
secretary then left us, and returned to the road to start the 
beat. 

The machan I was on, with the two princesses, was a solidly- 
built affair laid with a thick carpet, with silk cushions to sit on. 
Accustomed only to sitting on hard branches, the luxury of 
the machan— following on an early rise and a long walk- 
made me drowsy and I was on the point of falling asleep when I 
was roused to full wakefulness by the distant sound of a bugle; 
the beat had started. Taking part in the beat were ten 
elephants, the Secretaries, A.D.C.s, household staff of the 
Maharaja, the head shikari and his assistants, and two hundred 
men collected from the surrounding villages. The heavy cover 
on the floor of the valley was to be beaten by the elephants on 
which the Secretaries and others were mounted, while the two 
hundred men beat the slopes on either side. Some of these 
beaters were to form a line on the two ridges and walk ahead 
of the beat to prevent the tiger from breaking out. 

All the arrangements for the beat, and the beat itself, were 
intensely interesting for me for I was witnessing as a spectator 
an event in which I had hitherto always been an actor. There 
was nothing in the arrangements or in the conduct of the beat 
that could be found fault with. The time of day had been well 
chosen; we had been led to our machans in perfect silence; and 
that the cover was being well beaten was evident from the 
number of birds, including kalege pheasants, jungle-fowl, and 
peafowl, that the line was putting up. Beats are always 
exciting, for from the moment the distant shouting of the men 
is heard, the tiger can be expected to be on the move. The 
Maharaja was handicapped by deafness but he had a good man 
with him, and presently I saw this man pointing to the right. 
After looking in this direction for a moment or two the 
Maharaja shook his head, and a little later a sambhar stag 
crossed the stream and on winding the Maharaja dashed past 
us up the valley. 



The line of men on the ridge on the left was now visible, and 
the time had come for the tiger to appear. On came the beat 
with every man taking part in it shouting and clapping his 
hands, and every yard they advanced my hopes of the Maharaja 
shooting the tiger on which he had set his heart diminished, for 
no bird or animal had given an alarm-call. My young 
companions on the machan were keyed up, and the Maharaja 
was holding his rifle ready, for if the tiger appeared now he 
would have to take a quick shot. But rifles were of no use today, 
for the tiger was not in the beat. Ladders were produced and a 
very dejected party climbed down from the machans and joined 
an even more dejected staff on the ground. No one engaged in 
the beat had seen anything of the tiger, and no one knew what 
had gone wrong. But that something had gone wrong was 
evident, for shortly before our arrival in the cars the tiger had 
been heard calling in the valley. I had a suspicion that I knew 
why the beat had miscarried but, as I was only a spectator, I 
said nothing. After a picnic lunch we returned to camp, and 
while the others rested I went off and had a grand evening's 
fishing on the Kosi, for it was the latter end of April and the 
fishing was at its best. 

During and after dinner that night, the abortive beat of the day 
and five previous unsuccessful beats for the same tiger was 
discussed in minute detail and a reason sought for their failure. 
On the first occasion on which a beat had been organized in the 
valley for this particular tiger, he had come out on the right of 
the machan and the Maharaja, taking an awkward shot from a 
fixed seat, had missed him. In the succeeding beats, carried out 
over a period of three years, the tiger had not again been seen, 
though he was known to have been in the valley before the 
beats started. While the others had been talking and writing on 
tablets for the Maharaja's benefit, I had been thinking. The 
Maharaja was a good sportsman, and if I could help him to 
shoot the tiger on which he had set his heart it was up to me to 
try. A mistake had been made that day in taking the Maharaja's 
party to the machans, past the spot where the tiger was 



thought to be lying up, but this mistake was not responsible for 
the failure of the beat, for the tiger had left the valley at about 
the time the Maharaja's party had entered it. The single alarm- 
call of a kakar, heard shortly after we had left our cars, was all 
the foundation I had for my suspicion that the tiger walked out 
of the valley as we walked into it. Later when it became evident 
that an empty jungle had been beaten, I looked round to see if 
there was any other way for the tiger to leave the valley 
without passing the machans. Starting on the ridge behind 
the machans a landslide extended right down into the valley. 
The kakar had called at the upper end of this landslide and if 
there was a game track here running down to the cover in 
which the tiger had his kill, then it was guite possible that he 
left the valley by this track every time he heard preparations 
being made for a beat. 

The plan that had been forming in my mind while the others 
talked was to put the Maharaja on the ridge, where 
the kakar had called, and beat the tiger up to him. Beating a 
second time for the tiger on the following day had been vetoed 
by every one, on the ground that as the tiger had not been 
found on a fresh kill there was no hope of finding him on a stale 
one. So even if my plan failed no harm would be done, for no 
arrangements had been made for the following day. Taking a 
tablet from one of the secretaries I wrote on it, 'If you can be 
ready at 5 a.m. tomorrow, I should like to do a one-man beat for 
the tiger we failed to get today 1 , and handed the paper to the 
Maharaja. After reading what I had written the Maharaja 
passed the paper to his secretary, and from hand to hand it 
went round the room. I expected opposition from the staff, and 
it came now. However, as the Maharaja was willing to fall in 
with my plans, the staff reluctantly agreed to all conventions 
being set aside, and to the Maharaja going out with me next 
morning accompanied only by two gun-bearers. 

Punctually at 5 a.m. the Maharaja, his two gun-bearers, and I, 
left the camp by car and motored three miles down the road to 
where an elephant, carrying a small machan, was waiting for 



us. Transferring the Maharaja and his two men to the elephant 
I set out on foot to guide the elephant through several miles of 
forest in which I had never been before. Fortunately I have a 
sense of direction, and though it was dark when we started I 
was able to steer a more or less straight course, and as the sun 
was rising we arrived on the ridge where the landslide started. 
Here I was delighted to find a well-used game-track leading up 
from the valley, and on a tree near the track I put up 
the machan. When the Maharaja and one gun bearer had taken 
their seats on the machan I sent the elephant away, and taking 
the other gun-bearer with me, put him up on a tree farther 
along the ridge. These preparations completed, I set off to do a 
one-man beat. 

The way down into the valley was terribly steep and rough but 
as I was not hampered with a rifle, I accomplished descent 
safely. Passing the machans we had sat on the previous day, I 
went down the valley on silent feet, and two hundred yards 
beyond the heavy cover in which I suspected the tiger was 
lying, I turned and retraced my steps, talking to myself in a low 
voice as I did so. Where the tiger dragged the buffalo into the 
heavy cover there was a fallen tree. Lighting a cigarette I sat 
down on this tree, to listen if the jungle had anything to tell me. 
All remained quiet, so after coughing a few times and 
drumming my heels against the hollow tree I set out to find the 
kill and see if the tiger had returned to it. I found the kill 
tucked away under some thick bushes and was delighted to see 
that the tiger had eaten a meal only a few minutes previously 
and that the ground on which he had been lying was still warm. 
Running back to the hollow tree I hammered on it with a stone 
and shouted at the top of my voice, to let the man with the 
Maharaja know that the tiger was coming. A minute or two 
later a rifle shot rang out above me, and when I got to the ridge 
I found the Maharaja standing on the game track, looking at 
the fine tiger he had shot. 

In the palace at Jind, now occupied by the Maharaja's eldest 
son, there is a skin with a label which reads, 'Jim's Tiger'. And 



in the late Maharaja's game-book there is an entry giving the 
date and place, and the circumstances in which the old tiger 
was shot. 

Beat No. 3 

It was the last day of a memorable shoot. Memorable not only 
for us who had been privileged to take part in it, but also for 
the administrators of the country, for a Viceroy had for the first 
time in the history of India left the beaten track to spend a few 
days in the Kaladhungi jungles. 

No individual's movements were more strictly ruled by 
precedents than the movements of the Viceroy of India, and 
any deviation from the beaten track was a contingency that had 
never been contemplated, and for which no provision had been 
made. When, therefore. Lord Linlithgow, shortly after assuming 
the Viceroyalty of India, decided to leave the track his 
predecessors had followed and blaze a track for himself, it was 
only natural that his decision should have caused consternation 
throughout the land. Custom decreed that the ruler of India 
should tour the southern provinces of his domain during the 
ten days hiatus between the closing of his Legislative Offices in 
Delhi and their reopening in Simla, and it was Lord 
Linlithgow's decision not to conform with this age-old custom 
that caused the long to be remembered flutter in the 
government dovecotes. 

I, a mere man in the street without any connexion with 
Government, was happily ignorant of the working of wheels 
within wheels of the administration when one day, towards the 
end of March, as I was setting out from our cottage at 
Kaladhungi to catch a fish for our dinner. Ram Singh, whose 
duty it was to fetch our daily post from the Post Office two 
miles away, came running back with a telegram which he said 
the Postmaster had informed him was very urgent. The 
telegram, which had been redirected from Naini Tal, was from 
Hugh Stable, Military Secretary to the Viceroy. It informed me 
that the Viceroy's visit to South India had been cancelled, and 



asked if I could suggest any place where the Viceroy could 
spend ten days, with the possibility of getting a little shooting 
before proceeding to Simla for the summer. The telegram 
concluded with a request for an early reply as time was short, 
and the matter urgent. Ram Singh does not speak English but 
having served us for thirty years he can understand it, and 
having stood round finding odd jobs to do while I read the 
telegram to Maggie, he now said he would hurry up and have 
his food and be ready in a few minutes to take my reply to 
Haldwani. Haldwani— our nearest telegraph and telephone 
office— is fourteen miles from Kaladhungi and by sending my 
reply by Ram Singh, instead of by the regular dak runner, I 
would save a matter of some twenty-four hours. After Ram 
Singh had left with my reply to Hugh Stable which read, 

'Please call me on Haldwani telephone at eleven hours 
tomorrow', I picked up my rod for the second time, for one can 
do a lot of thinking while fishing and I had much to think about, 
and, further, I still had our dinner to catch. Hugh Stable's 
telegram was quite clearly in the nature of an SOS, and the 
question I had to decide was, what could I do to help him? 

Going up the Kota road for two miles I cut across the lower end 
of the Farm Yard— where when a small boy I shot my first 
leopard— and made for a pool in the river in which a three- 
pound mahseer with whom I was acquainted lived. As I 
approached the pool I saw in the sand the pug marks of a tiger 
that had crossed the river early that morning. At the head of 
the pool, where the water runs fast and deep, there are three 
big rocks a foot above water which are continually wet with 
spray and in consequence as slippery as ice. Leopards use 
these rocks as stepping stones and one day I saw the tiger, 
whose pug marks were now on the sand, trying to do the same. 
I had chased the tiger that day for a mile without his knowing I 
was after him and twice I got to within shooting range, and on 
both occasions held my fire as I was not sure of killing him 
outright. And then as I saw he was making for the river I just 
kept him in sight for I knew I would get the shot I wanted when 



he was fording the river. As he approached the river it became 
evident that he intended crossing it dryshod by way of the 
stepping stones, and not wading it as I at first thought he 
intended doing. This suited me admirably for there was a 
twenty-foot drop on our side down which the tiger would have 
to go before reaching the river, and as he went over the edge to 
climb down I ran forward and lay down on the top of the bank 
above him. 

The three rocks were at a distance apart that an Olympian 
athlete could, if he had a good run, have taken in a hop, skip, 
and jump, and which I had seen leopards do in three graceful 
bounds. The tiger had just accomplished the first jump safely as 
I poked my head over the edge, but he bungled the second 
jump, and as his feet shot off the slippery rock he went heels 
over head into the deep and broken water. The noise from the 
water prevented my hearing what he said, but I could guess 
what it was for I had myself slipped on that self-same rock 
while trying to cross the river dryshod. On the far side of the 
broken water there is a short beach of dry sand. Floundering 
out on to this beach the tiger shook himself and then lay down 
and rolled over and over, drying his beautiful rich winter coat 
in the hot sand. Then getting to his feet he shook himself for a 
second time and walked guietly away to whatever place he was 
making for, without let or hindrance from me, for in the jungle 
it is not considered cricket to molest an animal that has 
provided entertainment. And now the pug marks of the tiger 
were showing on the sand again, but this time he had essayed 
the stepping stones safely for his feet when he crossed the 
sand had been dry. 

Below the stepping stones a rock jutted out from the far bank 
making a backwater which was my friend the three-pounder's 
favourite hunting ground. Twice before a Jock Scott cast on the 
sloping rock and gently drawn off, had brought 
the mahseer out with a rush. The throw was a long and a 
difficult one, for the branch of a tree hung low over the 
backwater and the rod had to be used from a crouching 



position, for mahseerwho have enemies on land, in the air, and 
in the water, are keen of sight and need a careful approach. 
Leaving the sandy beach, with the pug marks on it, I went 
upstream for a short distance, and while the ten-foot tapered 
cast I made that morning from carefully selected lengths of gut 
was soaking under a stone, put my rod together and had a 
smoke. When all was ready I pulled what I considered to be the 
exact length of line off the reel, and holding it carefully looped 
in my left hand crept down to the one spot from where it was 
possible to make a sideways cast on to the rock, for the bank 
behind did not permit of an orthodox cast. The new No. 8 Jock 
Scott put on in honour of the three-pounder landed exactly 
where I wanted it to, and as the drag of the line drew it off the 
rock into deep water, there was a swirl and a splash and for the 
third time my friend was well and truly hooked. It is not 
possible, when using light tackle, to stop the first mad rush of 
a mahseer, but by using just the right amount of strain he can 
be guided away from any snag he is making for, provided the 
snag is not on the same side of the river as the angler. I was 
fishing from the right bank and thirty yards below where I had 
hooked the fish a curved root jutted out into the water. On the 
two previous occasions the fish had broken me on this root, but 
I managed to steer him clear of it now with only a few inches to 
spare. Once he was in the pool, he was safe, and after letting 
him play himself out I drew him to the sandy beach and landed 
him by hand, for I had brought no landing net with me. My 
estimate of three pounds was half a pound out, on the right 
side, so not only would he furnish us with a dinner, but he 
would also provide a meal for a sick boy Maggie was nursing in 
the village, who loved fish above all other things. 

Having followed the advice given me on the rifle range when I 
was a boy, by sending Hugh Stable a non-committal telegram, I 
had given myself ample time to think, and to what extent my 
seeing the pug marks of the tiger and my success with 
the mahseer influenced my decision I cannot say; anyway, by 
the time I got home I had decided to tell Hugh Stable that 



Kaladhungi was the only place I could suggest for the Viceroy's 
holiday Maggie had tea ready on the veranda and while we 
were talking over the decision I had come to, Bahadur arrived. 
Bahadur can keep his mouth shut when there is any necessity 
to do so, so I told him about the telegram I had received from 
Delhi. Bahadur's eyes literally dance when he is excited, and I 
have never seen them dance as they did that day. A possibility 
of the Viceroy coming to Kaladhungi! Why, such a thing had 
never before been heard of. A great bandobast would have to 
be made and fortunately it was just the right time of the year to 
make it, for the crops had been harvested and every man in the 
village would be available. Later, when it became known that 
the Viceroy was coming to our jungles, not only our own 
tenants but every man in Kaladhungi was as excited and as 
pleased as Bahadur had been when he heard the news. Not 
because of any profit or preferment they hoped to derive from 
the visit, but simply and solely because of their desire to help in 
their own humble way to make the visit a success. 

It was dark when I started on my fourteen-mile walk to 
Haldwani next morning, for I wanted to see Geoff Hopkins, who 
was camped at Fatehpur, before my conversation with Hugh 
Stable. The road runs through jungle for the first seven miles 
and at that hour of the morning the jungle folk and I had it to 
ourselves. A mile beyond the Kaladhungi bazaar it started to 
get light and in the dust of the road I saw the fresh pug marks 
of a male leopard, going in the same direction as I was. 
Presently on rounding a bend in the road, I saw the leopard two 
hundred yards ahead of me. He seemed to sense my presence 
for I had hardly rounded the bend when he turned his head and 
looked at me. However, he kept to the road, occasionally 
looking over his shoulder, and when I had reduced the distance 
between us to fifty yards, he stepped off the road into a light 
patch of grass. Keeping steadily on and looking straight ahead, 
out of the corner of my eye I saw him crouched down in the 
grass a few feet from the road. A hundred yards along when I 
looked over my shoulder I saw he was back on the road. To him 



I was just a wayfarer for whom he had made way and a few 
hundred yards farther on he left the road and entered a deep 
ravine. For a mile I had the road to myself, and then out of the 
jungle on the right trotted five red dogs. Fleet of foot, and 
fearless; flitting through the forests as silent and free as a 
butterfly, and when hungry, eating only of the best. Of all the 
animals I know none has a better life, than the Indian red dog. 

Geoff and Zillah Hopkins were sitting down to an early 
breakfast when I reached the forest bungalow, and were as 
pleased and excited as they could be when I told them of the 
errand on which I was going to Haldwani. Geoff was at that 
time Special Forest Officer, Tarai and Bhabar Government 
Estates, and without his help and co-operation I could make no 
concrete suggestions to Hugh Stable. Geoff rose nobly to the 
occasion. For the success of the shoot it was essential for me to 
have two shooting blocks in his forests. Both the blocks I 
wanted were fortunately available at the time, and Geoff said 
he would reserve them for me. He also very kindly offered me 
the Dachauri block in the adjoining government forest, which 
he had reserved for himself. Everything, from seeing the pug 
marks of the tiger in the sand, the catching of the mahseer, and 
now my successful visit to Geoff, was going splendidly, and I 
never felt the miles as they passed under rny feet as I 
completed my journey to Haldwani. 

Hugh Stable was on the telephone punctually at eleven o'clock 
and for the next hour we carried on an uninterrupted 
conversation, over the three-hundred-mile-long line. In that 
hour Hugh learnt that there was a small village at the foothills 
of the Himalayas called Kaladhungi; that this village was 
surrounded by jungles in which there was a variety of game; 
that I knew of no place in India where a more pleasant holiday 
could be spent. From Hugh I learnt that the Viceregal party 
would consist of Their Excellencies Lord and Lady Linlithgow, 
and their three daughters, the Ladies Anne, Joan, and Doreen 
(Bunty) Hope. With the party would come H.E.'s personal staff, 
for even when on holiday the Viceroy of India does a full day's 



work. Finally I learnt I had only fifteen days in which to make 
all my preparations for the shoot. Mouse Maxwell, the 
Controller of the Viceroy's Household, motored from Delhi to 
Kaladhungi the following day, and he was followed by the head 
of the Police, the head of the C.I.D., the head of the Civil 
Administration, the head of the Forest Department, and by 
many other heads. But most terrifying of all by a Guardsman 
who informed me he was bringing a company of soldiers to 
Kaladhungi to guard the person of the Viceroy. 

Bahadur had been right when he said a great bandobast would 
have to be made, but how great that bandobast would have to 
be neither he nor I had dreamed. However, with the whole¬ 
hearted help and co-operation of all concerned everything had 
progressed smoothly and well, without a single hitch or set¬ 
back. Four beats had been successfully carried out and four 
tigers had been cleanly shot, with the minimum expenditure of 
ammunition, by people who had never before seen tigers in the 
wilds. Only those who have taken part in tiger beats will know 
how great an achievement this had been. And now the last day 
of that memorable shoot had come with only one, the youngest, 
member of the party left to shoot a tiger. The beat that day was 
to take place on a semicircular bit of ground which in bygone 
years had been the bed of the Boar river, but which now is 
clothed with dense tree and scrub jungle interspersed with 
small patches of nal grass, and thickets of wild oranges. 

Five machans had been built in trees on what at one time had 
been the bank of the river, and the tiger was to be beaten off 
the low ground towards these machans. 

Making a wide detour, for many beats are ruined by taking the 
guns to their machans past the cover in which the tiger is 
assumed to be lying up, I brought the party up from behind 
the machans and while the stops, who had accompanied us, 
fanned out to right and left to take up position on the trees I 
had previously marked for them, Peter Borwick (one of H.E.'s 
A.D.C.s), Bahadur, and I, started to put the guns in position. On 
No. 1 machan I put Anne, and on No. 2 machan I put H.E. No. 



3 machan had been built in the only tree available at this spot, 
a stunted kart bair (wood plum) tree. It had been my intention 
to put Bahadur on thismachan to act as a stop. On being 
stopped I expected the tiger to turn to the left, and for this 
reason I had selected No. 4 machan for Bunty, the only member 
of the party who had not shot a tiger. 

Coming from the direction of the cover, in which I knew the 
tiger was lying up, a game-track ran up the bank and passed 
right under No. 3 machan. I was certain the tiger would come 
along this track and as themachan was only six feet above 
ground I had decided that, though it would be quite safe to put 
an experienced stop on it, it would be too dangerous for a gun. 
Now, however, as the two girls, Peter, Bahadur, and I, reached 
the machan and Bahadur started to climb on to it, on the spur 
of the moment I changed my plans. Putting my hand on 
the machan, which was on a level with my head, I whispered to 
Bunty that I wanted her to sit on it with Peter to keep her 
company. This— after I had pointed out the danger— she 
consented to do without a moment's hesitation. I then begged 
her not to shoot at the tiger until it reached a spot on the track 
that I would mark, and to take very careful aim at its throat. 
Bunty promised to do both of these things, so Peter and I lifted 
her on to the machan. After I had given Peter a leg up I handed 
him my 450/400 D.B. rifle, a similar weapon to the one Bunty 
was armed with. (Peter was unarmed, for he was to have 
accompanied me in the beat.) Then going down the bank I 
walked up the game-track, and when within twenty feet of 
themachan, laid a dry stick across the track and as I did so I 
looked up at Bunty and she nodded her head. 

Lady Joan, Bahadur, and I, now went to the tree on which No. 

4 machan had been built. This machan was twenty feet above 
ground and from it to No. 3 machan— thirty yards away— there 
was a clear and uninterrupted view. When I climbed the ladder 
after Joan to hand her rifle, I begged her not to allow the tiger 
to reach No. 3 machan if Bunty and Peter failed to stop it. 'I 
will do my best/ she said, adding, 'don't you worry/ There were 



no bushes and only a few scattered trees on this part of the 
bank, and the tiger would be in full view of these 
two machans from the time it left the cover sixty yards away 
until it was, I hoped, shot dead by Bunty. Putting Bahadur on 
No. 5 machan, to act as a stop if necessary, I circled outside the 
beat and came out on to the Boar river. 

The sixteen elephants that were to do the beating were 
collected a quarter of a mile down the river, near the pool in 
which I caught the mahseer. They were in charge of old Mohan, 
a friend of many years standing, who for thirty years had been 
Wyndham's head shikari, and who knew more about tigers than 
any man in India. Mohan was on the look-out for me, and on 
seeing me come out of the jungle and wave my hat he started 
the elephants up the bed of the river. Sixteen elephants walking 
in line over boulder-strewn ground take some time to cover a 
quarter of a mile, and while I sat on a rock and smoked I had 
ample time to think, and the more I thought the more uneasy I 
became. For the first time in my life I was endangering the life 
of one, and quite possibly two, human beings, and the fact that 
it was the first time gave me little comfort. Before his arrival in 
Kaladhungi Lord Linlithgow asked me to draw up a set of rules. 
These rules had been scrupulously obeyed, and with over three 
hundred people in camp, and daily excursions to near and 
distant shooting and fishing grounds, no one had received so 
much as a scratch. And now on this last day I, whom everyone 
trusted, had done a thing that I was bitterly regretting. On a 
frail machan, only six feet above ground, and on which I would 
not have trusted any man of my acquaintance, I had put a 
young girl little more than sixteen years of age to shoot a tiger 
as it came straight towards her, the most dangerous shot that 
one can take at a tiger. Both Bunty and Peter were as brave as 
tigers, as was abundantly evident by the fact that after I had 
pointed out the danger to them they had unhesitatingly taken 
their seats on the machan. But bravery alone without accuracy 
of aim would not be sufficient, and of their ability to hold a rifle 
straight I had no knowledge. Mohan arrived with the elephants 



while I was still undecided whether to call off the beat or go on 
with it, and when I told him what I had done he drew in his 
breath— the Indian equivalent to the Western whistle— closed 
his eyes tight and on reopening them said, 

'Don't ghabrao (worry) Sahib. Everything will be all right. 1 

Calling the mahouts together I told them it was very essential 
for us to move the tiger without frightening it, and that after 
lining-out on the river bank they would take their signal from 
me. When they saw me take my hat off and wave it they would 
give one shout, after which they would clap their hands and 
continue to clap them until I replaced the hat on my head. This 
procedure would be repeated at short intervals and if it failed 
to move the tiger I would give the signal to advance, and the 
advance would be made in silence and dead slow. Our initial 
shout would serve a double purpose, it would rouse the tiger 
from his sleep, and it would alert the guns. 

A strip of jungle three hundred yards wide and five hundred 
yards long was to be beaten, and when the elephants had lined- 
out on either side of me I took off my hat and waved it. After 
giving one lusty shout the men started clapping their hands 
and after they had clapped for three or four minutes, I replaced 
my hat. There were sambhar, cheetal, kakar, peafowl, and 
jungle-fowl in that area, and I listened anxiously for an alarm- 
call, but heard none. Five minutes later I again took off my hat 
and waved it and a minute, or it may have been two, later, a 
rifle shot rang out and I started to count the seconds, for much 
can be learnt by the spacing of shots in a tiger beat. One, two, 
three, four, five, I counted and I was beginning to breathe 
again when two shots rang out in quick succession. Again one, 
two, three, four, and a fourth shot rang out. The first and the 
fourth shot had been fired when the muzzle of the rifle was 
facing in my direction. When the other two shots were fired the 
muzzle had been facing away from me. This could mean only 
one thing, that there had been trouble and that Joan had had to 
help, for the machan H.E. was on was not within sight of 
Bunty's machan. 



With my heart racing and fears assailing me that I was too 
frightened to give expression to, I handed over the line to 
Mohan to bring up and told Ajmat, the mahout of the elephant I 
was on, to go as fast as he could straight to where the shots 
had been fired. Ajmat, who has been trained by Wyndham, is 
absolutely fearless and the best man on an elephant I have ever 
known. And his elephant is as well trained and as fearless as he 
is. Straight through thorn bushes, over big rocks and broken 
ground, and under overhanging branches we went, my uneasy 
thoughts racing ahead of us. And then as we crashed into a 
patch of twelve-foot-high nalgrass the elephant hesitated 
before going on again, and Ajmat leant back and whispered, 
'She can smell the tiger, so hold tight Sahib, for you are 
unarmed. 1 Only another hundred yards to go now, and as yet no 
signal had come from the guns, each of whom had been 
provided with a railwayman's whistle with instructions to blow 
it if help was needed. But the fact that no whistle had sounded 
gave me no comfort for I knew from past experience that in 
times of excitement even bigger things than whistles can be 
dropped from a machan. And then through the trees I caught 
sight of Joan and could have shouted with joy and relief, for she 
was unconcernedly sitting on her machan with her rifle across 
her knees. On seeing me she spread her arms wide— which I 
rightly interpreted as meaning a big tiger— and then pointed 
down in front of Bunty's machan. 

The rest of the story, which makes my heart miss a beat as I 
relate it even after this lapse of fifteen years, is soon told; a 
story which, but for the courage of three young people and 
superlative marksmanship, would have ended in a terrible 
tragedy. 

Our shout when I started the beat was clearly heard by the 
guns, also the faint clapping of our hands. Then in the interval 
the tiger broke cover sixty yards in front of machan No. 3, and 
came slowly along the game-track. It reached the foot of the 
bank as we on the elephants shouted the second time. On 
hearing this shout the tiger stopped and looked over its 



shoulder. Satisfied that there was no need to hurry, it stood 
listening for a minute or so, and then started up the bank. 
When it reached the spot where I had laid a dry stick across 
the track, Bunty fired, but she fired at its chest, for the tiger 
was holding its head low and she could not see its throat. On 
receiving the shot, which was well placed, and before either 
Bunty or Peter was able to get in a second shot, the tiger 
sprang forward with a roar and attacked the machan from 
underneath. While the frailmachan was rocking on the stunted 
tree and threatening to disintegrate under the onslaught of the 
tiger, and while Bunty and Peter were trying desperately to 
push the muzzles of their rifles through the floor of 
themachan, Joan, from her machan thirty yards away, knocked 
the tiger down with her first shot and as it fell to the ground 
put a second bullet into it. On receiving Joan's second bullet 
the tiger started to go down the bank, evidently with the 
intention of regaining the thick cover it had just left, and Bunty 
then put a bullet through the back of its head. 

That was our Viceroy's first visit to Kaladhungi, but it was not 
his last, and during the many subsequent occasions on which 
he honoured our small foothill village with his presence I never 
had one moment's anxiety for his safety, or for the safety of 
those who accompanied him. For I never again took risks such 
as I took on the last day of that memorable shoot. 



Chapter Eleven 

FROM NOVEMBER TO MARCH THE climate of the Himalayan 
foothills has no equal, and the best of these five months is 
February. In February the air is crisp and invigorating and the 
wealth of bird life that migrated down from the high mountains 
in November, in search of food and of warmth, is still with us. 
The deciduous trees that have stood gaunt and naked 
throughout the autumn and winter are bursting into bloom, or 
are putting on a mantle of tender leaf buds of varying shades of 
green or pink. In February spring is in the very air, in the sap of 
all trees, and in the blood of all wild life. Whether it be on the 
mountains in the north, or the plains in the south, or in the 
shelter of the foothills, spring comes in a night. It is winter 
when you go to bed one night and when you awaken next 
morning it is spring, and round you all nature is rejoicing in 
anticipation of the pleasures that lie ahead, plentiful food, 
warmth, and the reproduction of life. The migrant birds are 
packing into small groups, these groups will join others, and on 
the appointed day and at the command of the leaders the 
pigeons, paroquets, thrushes, and other fruit-eaters will fly up 
the valleys to their selected nesting grounds while insect-eaters 
flitting from tree to tree in the same direction and on the same 
quest will cover at most a few miles a day. While the migrants 
are preparing for departure and the regular inhabitants of the 
foothills are selecting each his own mate and looking for a 
building site, the combined population of the jungle are vying 
with each other in a vocal contest which starts at daylight and 
continues non-stop until dark. In this contest all take part even 
to the predatory birds whose most vocal member, the serpent 
eagle, while showing as a mere speck against the blue sky 
sends his piercing cry back to earth. 

While instructing troops in jungle warfare I was in a forest one 
day in Central India with a party of men among whom were 
several bird enthusiasts. High in the heavens above us a 
serpent eagle was circling and screaming. The party was a new 
draft from different parts of the United Kingdom, destined for 



Burma, none of whom had ever seen a serpent eagle. Waiting 
until we came to an open glade I pointed to a speck in the sky. 
Field-glasses were produced and disappointment was 
expressed at the bird being too far away to identify or to see 
clearly. Telling my companions to stand quite still I took a 
three-inch-long reed from mv pocket, and sounded a note on it. 
This reed, split at one end and blocked up at the other, 
reproduced with great exactitude the piercing call of a young 
deer in distress and was used in my training for signalling, for 
it is the only natural sound to be heard— both by day and by 
night— in jungles in which there are deer, and it was, 
therefore, a sound least likely to attract the attention of an 
enemy. On hearing the sound the eagle stopped screaming, for 
though a serpent eagle, living principally on snakes, he does 
not despise other flesh. Closing his wings he dropped a few 
hundred feet and then again started soaring in circles. At each 
call he came nearer, until finally he was circling just above 
tree-top level where the party with me had a close and clear 
view of him. Do those who were in that party of fifty, and who 
survived the Burma campaign, remember that day in the 
Chindwara jungles and your disappointment at my not being 
able to make the eagle perch on a branch close enough to 
photograph? Never mind. Accompany me now on this spring 
morning and we will see many things just as interesting as that 
serpent eagle. 

You have travelled far on the road of knowledge since that 
distant Chindwara day. Self-preservation has taught you that 
the human eye has a field of vision of 180 degrees. Pin-pointing 
sound which at first you found so difficult is now second nature 
to you. And having learnt when a boy the difference between 
the smell of a rose and of a violet you can now identify each 
tree and plant by the smell of its flower even when that flower 
is at tree-top level, or hidden deep in the jungle. But much as 
you learnt and greatly as the knowledge has added to your 
confidence, safety and pleasure, much still remains to learn 
and on this beautiful spring morning we will add a little to our 



store of knowledge. 

The canal that forms the northern boundary of our estate, and 
in which the girls used to bathe, is conveyed across the 
watercourse I have previously referred to by an aqueduct. This 
aqueduct is known as Bijli Dant,which means, 'lightning water 
channel'. The original aqueduct built by Sir Henry Ramsay was 
destroyed by lightning many years ago, and because of a local 
superstition that lightning is attracted to a given spot by an evil 
spirit, usually in the form of a snake, the old foundations were 
not used and a parallel aqueduct was built that has been 
functioning now for half a century. Wild animals that visit the 
village at night from the jungles to the north, and who do not 
like wading or jumping the ten-foot-wide canal, pass under the 
aqueduct. So on this spring morning we will start our walk 
from this point. 

On the sand in the passage-way under the arch of the aqueduct 
are the tracks of hare, kakar, pig, porcupine, hyaena, and 
jackal. Of these the only tracks we will look closely at are the 
tracks of the porcupine, for, having been made after the night 
wind had died down, they are free of drift sand. Five toes and a 
pad and each footprint is distinct, for a porcupine has no need 
to stalk and does not superimpose one foot upon another. In 
front of each print is a small hole in the sand made by the 
porcupine's strong nails, on which he depends to a great extent 
for his food. The hind pads of porcupines are elongated. This 
projection, or heel, is not as marked as it is in the case of bear. 
It is, however, sufficiently marked to distinguish the track of a 
porcupine from the tracks of all other animals. If you want 
further confirmation, look closely at the track and you will see 
a number of finely-drawn lines running between, or parallel to, 
the track. These finely drawn lines are made by the long 
drooping quills of the porcupine when they make contact with 
the ground. A porcupine cannot cast or project its quills, which 
are barbed, and its method of defence or attack is to raise its 
quills on end and run backwards. At the end of a porcupine's 
tail are a number of hollow quills, not unlike long wine glasses 



on slender stems. These quills are used as a rattle to intimidate 
enemies, and to convey water to the porcupine's burrow. The 
quills readily fill with water when submerged, and the 
porcupine uses this water to keep its burrow cool and free of 
dust. Porcupines are vegetarians and live on fruit, roots, and 
field-crops. They also consume the horns shed by deer and the 
horns of deer killed by leopards, wild dogs, and tigers, possibly 
to obtain calcium or some other vitamin absent in their normal 
food. Though a comparatively small animal a porcupine has a 
big heart, and he will defend himself against great odds. 

For a few hundred yards above the aqueduct the bed of the 
watercourse is stony and, except where a game-track crosses 
it, we shall find no more tracks until we come to a long stretch 
of fine silt, washed down from the foothills, on which the tracks 
of all the animals that use the watercourse as a highway show 
up clearly. This stretch of ground is flanked on either side by 
dense lantana in which deer, pig, peafowl, and jungle-fowl, 
shelter during daylight hours and into which only leopards, 
tigers, and porcupines venture at night. In the lantana you can 
now hear jungle-fowl scratching up the dead leaves, and a 
hundred yards away on the topmost branch of a 
leafless samal tree is perched their most deadly enemy, a 
crested eagle. The eagle is not only the enemy of jungle-fowl, 
he is also the enemy of peafowl. These are his natural prey and 
the fact that there are as many old birds as young ones in the 
jungle, is proof that they are able to look after themselves. For 
this reason I never interfered with crested eagles until one day, 
on hearing the distressed cry of a young deer, I hurried to the 
spot and found a crested eagle holding down a month- 
old cheetal fawn and tearing at its head, while the distracted 
mother ran round in circles striking at the bird with her 
forefeet. Desperately as the brave mother had tried to rescue 
her young one— and of this the scratches and blood on her 
muzzle bore ample proof— the great eagle had been too much 
for her, and though I was able to dispose of her enemy I was 
unable to do anything for her young, beyond putting it out of its 



misery, for even if I had been able to heal its wounds I would 
not have been able to restore its sight. That incident has cost 
the lives of many crested eagles in the jungles in which I have 
hunted, for though it is difficult to approach close enough to 
shoot them with a shotgun, they offer a good target for an 
accurate rifle. The bird on the samal tree, however, has nothing 
to fear from us for we have come out to see things, and not to 
deal with the enemies of young deer. In my catapult days the 
greatest battle in which a crested eagle has ever been engaged 
took place on a stretch of sand, in the bed of the river, a little 
below the Boar bridge. Possibly mistaking a fish cat for a hare 
the eagle stooped on it and either because he was unable to 
withdraw his talons, or because he lost his temper, became 
involved in life-and-death struggle. Both contestants were 
equally well armed for the battle; the cat with its teeth and 
claws, and the eagle with its beak and talons. It is greatly to be 
regretted that photography at that time was confined to studios 
and movie cameras were unknown, and that no record was 
made of that long-drawn-out and desperate battle. If a cat has 
nine lives an eagle has ten, and it was lives that ultimately 
proved the deciding factor. With one precarious life still in hand 
the eagle left his dead opponent on the sand, and trailing a 
broken wing went down to a pool in the river where, after 
quenching his thirst, he surrendered his tenth life. 

Several game-tracks lead on to the open ground from 
the lantana and while we have been looking at the eagle a 
young kakar stag has walked out of the lantana on to the 
watercourse, fifty yards away, with the intention of crossing it. 

If we freeze and remain frozen, he will take no notice of us. Of 
all the animals in the jungle the kakar gives the impression of 
being most on his toes. Even here on this open ground he is 
walking on tiptoe with his hind legs tucked well under him and 
at the first indication of danger, be it conveyed by sight, sound, 
or smell, he will dash away at top speed. The kakar is 
sometimes described as being a mean and a cowardly little 
animal, and unreliable as a jungle informant. With this 



description I do not agree. No animal can be called mean for 
that is exclusively a human trait, and no animal that lives in the 
densest jungles with tigers, as the kakar does, can be accused 
of being a coward. As for being an unreliable informant I know 
of no better friend that a man who shoots on foot can have in a 
jungle than a kakar. He is small and defenceless and his 
enemies are many, and if in a beat he barks at a python or at a 
pine-marten, when he is expected to bark only at a tiger, he is 
more to be pitied than accused of being unreliable. For to him 
and his kind, these two ruthless enemies are a very real 
menace and he is only carrying out his function— as a watcher 
— when he warns the jungle folk of their presence. 

The kakar has two long canine teeth or tusks on its upper jaw. 
These tusks are very sharp and are the kakar's only means of 
defence, for the points of his short horns are curved inwards 
and are of little use asweapons of defence. Some years ago 
there was a long and inconclusive correspondence in the Indian 
press about a peculiar sound that kakar make on occasions. 

This sound can best be described as a clicking sound, 
resembling that made by the bones used by Christy minstrels. 

It was asserted by some that, as the sound was only heard 
when kakar were running, it was caused by double joints, and 
by others that it was caused by the tusks being clashed 
together in some unexplained way. Both these assertions, and 
others that were advanced, were incorrect. The sound is made 
by the animal's mouth in exactly the same way as all other 
vocal sounds are made, and is used on various occasions: as, 
for instance, when uncertain of a seen object, when disturbed 
by a gun dog, or when pursuing a mate. The alarm call of 
the kakar is a clear ringing bark, resembling that of a medium¬ 
sized dog. 

While the kakar has been crossing the watercourse a large 
flight of insect and fruit-eating birds has approached us from 
our right. In this flight are migrants as well as local 
inhabitants, and if we stand where we are the birds will fly over 
our heads and you will have an opportunity of studying them as 



they perch on the trees and bushes on both sides of the 
watercourse, and also while they are in flight. Birds, except 
when they are very close, are difficult to identify by their 
colours when sitting where they have no background or when 
seen against the sky; but every species of bird can be identified 
while in flight by its shape and by its wing beats. In the flight 
that is approaching us, every member of which is either 
chirping, twittering, or whistling, are two varieties of minivets, 
the short-billed scarlet, and the small orange-breasted. 

Minivets perch on the topmost leaves and twigs of trees and 
bushes, and from these commanding positions keep darting 
into the air to catch winged insects disturbed by their own kind 
or by other members of the flight. With the minivets are: 

Six varieties of tits. The grey, yellow-cheeked, blue-winged, red¬ 
billed, white-eyed, and the common green. 

Four varieties of flycatchers. The white-browed fantail, yellow 
fantail, slaty-headed, and verditer. 

Six varieties of woodpeckers. The golden-backed, black-naped 
green, rufous-bellied pied, pigmy pied, yellow-naped, and the 
scaly-bellied green. 

Four varieties of bulbuls. The golden-fronted green, white¬ 
winged green, white-cheeked crested, and the red-whiskered. 

Three varieties of sunbirds. The Himalayan red, purple, and the 
small green. 

In addition to these birds, which number between two and 
three hundred, there are a pair of black-headed golden orioles 
who are chasing each other from tree to tree, and a lesser 
racket-tailed drongo who, though not as aggressive as his big 
brother, has nevertheless acquired several juicy morsels from 
the flight he is guarding, the last being a fat larva industriously 
dug out of a dry branch by the pigmy pied woodpecker. The 
flight of birds has now flown over our heads and disappeared 
into the jungle on our left, and the only sound to be heard is the 
scratching of the jungle-fowl in the lantanay and the only bird 



to be seen is the crested eagle, patient and hopeful, on the 
topmost branch of the samal tree. 

Beyond the lantana on the right is an open stretch of parklike 
ground, on which grow a number of big plum trees. From this 
direction now comes the alarm bark of a red monkey, followed 
a few seconds later by the excited chattering and barking of 
fifty or more monkeys of varying ages and sizes. A leopard is on 
the move and as he is on more or less open ground it is unlikely 
that he is trying to secure a kill, in which case he is possibly 
making for one or other of the deep ravines in the foothills 
where leopards are often to be found during the hot hours of 
the day. Winding through the plum trees is a path used both by 
human beings and by animals. This path crosses our 
watercourse two hundred yards farther on and as there is a 
good chance, I would almost say a certainty, of the leopard 
coming along the path, let us hurry forward for a hundred and 
fifty yards and sit down with our backs against the high bank 
on the left. The watercourse here is fifty yards wide and on the 
trees on the left-hand side is a large troupe of langurs. The 
warning given by the red monkeys has been heeded, and all the 
mothers in the troupe have got hold of their young ones, and all 
eyes are turned in the direction from which the warning came. 

There is no need for you to keep your eyes on the path, for the 
young langur who is sitting out on the extreme end of a branch 
on the tree nearest the path will give us warning of the 
leopard's approach. Langurs act differently from red monkeys 
on seeing a leopard. This may be due to better organization, or 
to their being less courageous than their red cousins. All the 
red monkeys in a troupe will chatter and bark at the same time 
on seeing a leopard, and where the jungle is suitable they will 
follow it over the tree-tops for considerable distances. 

The langurs act differently. When the young look-out sees the 
leopard he will give the alarm call of, 'khok, khok, khok', and 
when the leader of the troupe, taking direction from the young 
one, sees the leopard and takes up the call the young one will 
stop. Thereafter only the leader and the oldest female will give 



the alarm call— the female call resembles a sneeze— and no 
attempt will be made to follow the leopard. And now the young 
look-out stands up on all fours, pokes his head forward and 
jerks it from side to side. Yes, he is convinced he can see the 
leopard, so he barks, and one or two hysterical companions 
behind him follow suit. The leader of the troupe now catches 
sight of the dread enemy and barks, and a second later is 
followed by the old female whose alarm call, 'tch', resembles a 
sneeze. The young ones are now silent and confine themsleves 
to bobbing their heads up and down, and making faces. The 
troupe appear to know instinctively that they have nothing to 
fear from the leopard on this spring morning, for if he had been 
hungry and out to kill he would not have walked out on to the 
open watercourse as he has done, but would have crossed 
either higher up or lower down, and approached them unseen. 
Being as agile, and little heavier, the leopard experiences no 
difficulty in catching langurs. But it is different with red 
monkeys, for they retire to the extremities of thin branches, 
where the leopard is afraid to trust his weight. 

With head held high, and the morning sun shining on his 
beautifully marked coat, the leopard is now crossing the fifty 
yards of open ground, paying not the slightest attention to 
the langurs clustered on the trees he is approaching. Once he 
stops, and after looking up and down the watercourse without 
noticing us as we sit motionless with our backs to the bank, he 
continues unhurriedly on his way. Climbing the steep bank he 
disappears from our view, but as long as he is in sight of the 
leader and of the old female they will continue to send their 
warning call into the jungle. 

Let us now examine the tracks of the leopard. The path where 
it crosses the watercourse runs over red clay, trodden hard by 
bare human feet. Over this clay is a coating of fine white dust, 
so the conditions for our purpose are ideal. We will assume that 
we did not see the leopard, and that we have come on the 
tracks by accident. The first thing we note is that the pug 
marks have every appearance of having been newly made, and 



therefore that they are fresh. We get this impression from the 
fact that the pile or nap of the dust where it took the weight of 
the leopard is laid flat and smooth, and that the walls of the 
dust surrounding the pads and toes are clear cut and more or 
less perpendicular. 

Presently under the action of the wind and the rays of the hot 
sun the nap will stand up again and the walls will begin to 
crumble. Ants and other insects will cross the track; dust will 
drift into it; bits of grass and dead leaves will be blown on to, 
or will fall on it; and in time the pug marks will be obliterated. 
There is no hard-and-fast rule by which you can judge the age 
of a track, whether it be the pug marks of a leopard or tiger, or 
the track of a snake or a deer. But by close observation and by 
taking into consideration the position of the track, whether in 
an exposed or in a sheltered spot, the time of day and of night 
when certain insects are on the move, the time at which winds 
normally blow, and the time at which dew begins to fall or to 
drip from the trees, you can make a more or less accurate 
guess when the track was made. In the present case we have 
satisfied ourselves from the appearance of the track that it is 
fresh, but this is not the only interesting point about it. We 
have yet to determine whether the leopard was a male or a 
female, whether it was old or young, and whether it was a big 
or a small animal. The round shape of the pug marks show it 
was a male. The absence of any cracks or creases in the pads, 
the round toes, and compact appearance of the entire pug 
marks show that the leopard was young. With regard to size, 
here again only observation and experience will enable you to 
judge the size of animals by their pug marks, and when you 
have gained this experience you can assess the length of either 
a leopard or a tiger to a possible error of an inch or two. The 
Koals of Mirzapur, when asked the size of a tiger, measure the 
pug mark with a blade of grass and then, laying the blade 
down, measure it with the width of their fingers. How accurate 
their method is I am not in a position to say. For myself I prefer 
to guess the size or length of an animal from the general 



appearance of its pug mark, for whatever method is adopted, it 
can at best be only a guess. 

A little beyond where the path crosses the watercourse there is 
a narrow strip of firm sand, flanked on one side by rocks and 
on the other by a high bank. A herd of cheetal has gone along 
this strip of sand. It is always interesting when in a jungle to 
count the number of animals in a herd, 

whether cheetal or sambhar, and to take note of the individual 
members. This enables you to recognize the herd when you 
next see it and to assess casualties, and, further, it gives you a 
friendly feeling towards the herd as being one that you know. If 
the herd is on open ground it is not difficult to count the stags, 
note the length and shape of their horns, and count the hinds 
and young ones. When, however, only one of the herd is visible 
and the others are in cover, the following method of inducing 
the hidden animals to come out into the open will, nine times 
out often, be found effective. After stalking to within a 
reasonable distance of the deer you can see, lie down behind a 
tree or a bush and give the call of a leopard. All animals can 
pin-point sound, and when the deer is looking in your direction 
project your shoulder a little beyond the bole of the tree, and 
move it slowly up and down once or twice, or shake a few 
leaves of the bush. On seeing the movement the deer will start 
calling; and its companions will leave the cover and range 
themselves on either side of her. I have on occasion got as 
many as fifty cheetal to show themselves in this way to enable 
me to photograph them at leisure. I would like, however, to add 
one word of warning. Never try calling like a leoperd, or any 
other animal, unless you are absolutely certain you have the 
area to yourself, and even then keep a careful look all round. 
The following is my reason for the warning. I heard a leopard 
calling repeatedly one night, and from the intonation of the call 
I concluded it was in distress. Before daylight next morning I 
set off to try to find out, if I could, what was wrong with the 
animal. During the night it had changed its position and I now 
located it on a hill some distance away, where it was still 



calling. Selecting a spot where a game-track led on to an open 
glade, and where I would see the leopard before it saw me, I 
lay down behind a boundary pillar and answered the call. 
Thereafter, for a matter of half an hour or more, call answered 
call. The leopard was coming but it was slow about it and was 
coming very cautiously. Eventually when it was a hundred 
yards away I stopped calling. I was lying flat down with my 
elbows resting on the ground and my chin resting in my hands, 
momentarily expecting the leopard to appear, when I heard the 
swish of leaves behind me and on turning my head, looked 
straight into the muzzle of a rifle. Late the previous evening 
Cassels, Deputy Commissioner of Naini Tal, and Colonel Ward 
had arrived at the forest bungalow and unknown to me had 
shot a leopard cub. During the night the mother had been 
heard calling and at crack of dawn Ward set out on an elephant 
to try to shoot the mother. Dew was on the ground, and the 
mahout was well trained, and he brought his elephant up 
without a sound until only a fringe of trees lay between us. 
Ward could see me, but he was not as young as he had been 
and, further, the early morning light was not too good, and he 
was unable to get the sights of his rifle to bear accurately on 
my shoulders, so he signalled the elephant to go forward. 
Mercifully for all of us, when the elephant cleared the fringe of 
trees and was only ten yards from me, and when the mahout— 
also an old man— was pointing and Ward was leaning down 
and aligning his sights for a second time the elephant released 
a branch it was holding down, and, hearing the sound, I turned 
my head and looked up into the muzzle of a heavy rifle. 

The herd of cheetal whose tracks we are looking at and in 
which we are now interested, went along the strip of sand the 
previous evening. This you can tell from the night insects that 
have crossed the tracks, and from the dew drops that have 
fallen on them from an overhanging tree. The herd may be a 
mile or five miles awav, out on an open glade or hidden in 
cover; even so, we will count the number of animals in the herd 
and this I will show you how to do. We will assume that when 



a cheetal is standing, the distance between its hind- and fore¬ 
hooves is thirty inches. Take a stick and draw a line across the 
sand at right angles to the tracks. Measure thirty inches from 
the line you have drawn, this will be easy for your shoes are ten 
inches long, and draw a second line across the sand parallel to 
the first. Now take your stick and count the number of hoof 
prints between the two lines, marking each print with the point 
of your stick as you do so. The result of your count is, let us say, 
thirty. Divide this number by two and you can 
be reasonably sure that there were fifteen cheetal in the herd 
that passed that way the previous evening. This method of 
counting animals of any species, whether wild or domestic, will 
give accurate results for small numbers, say up to ten, and 
approximate results for greater numbers, provided the 
distance between the hind- and fore-feet is known. In the case 
of small animals such as wild dogs, pigs, and sheep, the 
distance will be less than thirty inches, and in the case of large 
animals such as sambhar and domestic cattle it will be more 
than thirty inches. 

For the information of those who were not with me during the 
years of training for jungle warfare, I should like to assert that 
it is possible to glean a lot of useful information from the 
footprints of human beings in ajungle, whether seen on a road, 
path, or game-track, or in fact anywhere where the footprints 
of men in motion are to be seen. Let us assume, for the sake of 
interest, that we are in enemy country and that we have come 
on a game-track on which there are footprints. From the 
appearance of the footprints, their size, shape, absence or 
presence of nails or sprags, iron shod or plain heels, leather 
soles or rubber, and so on, we conclude that the prints have not 
been made by members of our own force, but by the enemy. 

This point being settled we have to determine when the party 
passed that way, and the number of men in the party. You know 
how to assess the time. To find out the number of men in the 
party we will draw a line across the track, and with the toe of 
one foot on this line take a step of thirty inches, and draw a 



second line across the track. The number of heel marks 
between these two lines will give the number of men in the 
party. There are other interesting things you can learn from the 
footprints, and one of the most important of these is the speed 
at which the party was travelling. When a human being is 
moving at a normal pace his weight is distributed evenly over 
his footprint and his stride is from thirty to thirty-two inches, 
according to his height. As the speed is increased less weight 
falls on the heel and more on the toes, the imprint of the heel 
gets less and the imprint of the toes greater, and the length of 
the stride gets longer. This process of less heel and more toes 
continues to get more apparent until when running at full 
speed little more than the ball ol the foot and the toes come in 
contact with the ground. If the party was a small one, ten or a 
dozen in all, it will be possible to see if any were limping, and 
blood on the track will indicate that one or more were 
wounded. 

If you ever get a flesh wound in the jungles I will show you a 
small and insignificant little plant that will not only cauterize 
but also heal your wound better than anything else that I know. 
The plant, which is found in all jungles, grows to a height of 
twelve inches, and has a daisylike flower on a long slender 
stem. The leaves are fleshy and serrated, like the leaf of a 
chrysanthemum. To use the plant break off a few leaves, rinse 
them in water to wash off the dust— if water is available— and 
then squeeze the leaves between finger and thumb, and pour 
the juice freely into the wound. No further treatment is needed 
and, if the wound is not a deep one, it will heal in a day or two. 
The plant is well named, Brahm Buti, 'God's flower'. 

Many of you were my good comrades in the Indian and Burma 
jungles during the war years and if I worked you hard, because 
time was short, you will long since have forgiven me. And I 
hope you have not forgotten all that we learnt together, as for 
instance: the fruit and flowers it was safe to eat; where to look 
for edible roots and tubers; the best substitutes for tea and 
coffee; what plants, barks, and leaves to use for fever, sores. 



and sore throats; what barks and creepers to use for 
stretchers, and for making ropes to sling heavy equipment and 
guns across streams and ravines; how to avoid getting trench 
feet and prickly heat; how to create fire; how to obtain dry fuel 
in a wet forest; how to kill game without resort to fire-arms; 
how to cook or make a dish of tea without metal utensils; how 
to procure a substitute for salt; how to treat snake bites, 
wounds, and stomach disorders. And, finally, how to keep fit 
and conduct ourselves in the jungles to leave at peace with all 
wildlife. These and many other things you and I, from the 
mountains and plains of India, from the villages and cities of 
the United Kingdom, from the United States of America, from 
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and from other lands, learned 
together. Not with the object of spending the rest of our days in 
the jungles, but to give us confidence in ourselves and in each 
other, to remove our fears of the unknown, and to show our 
enemies that you were better men than they. But much as we 
learned in those days of good comradeship we only touched the 
fringe of knowledge, for the book of nature has no end as it has 
no beginning. 

We have still much of our spring morning before us, and we 
have now arrived at the foothills where the vegetation differs 
from that on the flat ground we have recently traversed. Here 
there are a number of ficus and plum trees that have attracted 
a variety of fruit-eating birds, the most interesting of which are 
the giant hornbills. Hornbills nest in hollow trees and have the 
unusual habit of sealing the females into the nests. This habit 
throws a heavy burden on the male, for the female moults and 
grows enormously fat during the incubation period and when 
the eggs— usually two— are hatched she is unable to fly, and 
the male has the strenuous task of providing food for the whole 
family. By his ungainly appearance, his enormous beak fitted 
with a sound-box, and his heavy and laboured flight, the 
hornbill gives the impression of having missed the bus of 
evolution. And his habit of sealing up the nest and leaving only 
a small hole through which the female projects the tip of her 



beak to take the food the male brings her, possibly dates back 
to prehistoric days when the bird had more powerful enemies 
than it has today All birds that nest in hollow trees or that 
make holes in trees in which to nest, have common enemies. 
Some of these birds— tits, robins, hoopoes— are quite 
defenceless and the question therefore arises why the hornbill, 
who by reason of its powerful beak is best able to defend itself, 
should be the only one of these many tree-nesting birds to 
consider it necessary to seal up its nest. Another unusual habit 
which the hornbill does not share with any other bird that I 
know of, is its habit of adorning its feathers with pigment. This 
pigment, which is yellow and can be readily wiped off with a 
handkerchief, is carried in a small sack above the tail and is 
laid with the beak on to two broad white bands that extend 
across the width of the wings. Why the hornbill finds it 
necessary to paint these white bands yellow with a pigment 
that washes off every time it rains, I can only attribute to 
camouflage against an enemy, or enemies, that it suffered from 
in bygone days. For the only enemy it occasionally suffers from 
now is a leopard, and against a leopard operating at night 
camouflage is of little avail. 

In addition to the hornbills there are a number of other fruit¬ 
eating birds on the ficus and plum trees. Among these are two 
varieties of green pigeon, the Bengal, and the pintail. Two 
varieties of barbet, the crimson-breasted, and the common 
green. Four varieties of bulbul, the Himalayan black, common 
Bengal, red-whiskered, and white-cheeked. Three varieties of 
paroquets, the rose-ringed, the Alexandrine, and the blossom¬ 
headed. Scratching among the dead leaves and eating the ripe 
fruit dropped by the other birds, are fifty or more white-capped 
laughing thrushes. These thrushes were the last to migrate 
from the high nesting-grounds and will be the first to return to 
them. 

Near the ficus trees is a fire-track, and crossing it is a well- 
worn game-track which runs straight up the hill to a salt-lick 
near which there is a saucer of water fed by a tiny spring. 



Between the salt-lick and the water is an old stump. Here a 
stunted kusum tree stood, in the branches of which poachers 
repeatedly built machans. Shooting over salt-licks and over 
water is prohibited, but poachers are no respecters of game 
laws, and as dismantling the machans had no effect I 
eventually cut the tree down. I have heard it stated that 
carnivora do not kill at salt-licks and water holes. However 
considerate carnrvora may be in other parts of the world, in 
India they certainly have no compunction about killing at salt¬ 
licks. In fact it is at these places that they do most of their 
killing, as you can see from the bones and the horns partly 
eaten by porcupines that you will find in the vicinity of this salt¬ 
lick, and in the vicinity of all salt-licks that are surrounded by 
forests in which deer and monkeys live. 

Let us now climb the hill above the salt-lick to a point from 
where we can get a bird's eye view of the foothills and the 
forests that lie at their feet. Before us stretches the forest 
through which we have just come to our starting-point, the 
canal. This forest is as nature made it, for it has little timber of 
commercial value and has, therefore, escaped the devastating 
hand of man. The light green patches in the foreground 
are shishamsaplings which have grown from seeds washed 
down from the foothills by monsoon floods. Later, when these 
saplings grow to maturity, they will provide the best timber for 
cart wheels, and for furniture. The dark-green patches with 
clusters of red berries are runi trees, which provide the powder 
known to commerce as kamala. When the poor people who 
migrate in winter from the high hills to the foothills in search of 
food and warmth— as do the birds— can spare a day from their 
regular labours, old and young resort to the jungles to 
collect kamala. Kamala is a red powder which adheres to 
the runi berry, and the method of collection is to cut down the 
branches, strip the berries into big shallow baskets, and then 
with the hand rub the berries against the sides of the basket. 
The powder when freed from the berries drifts through the 
cracks in the basket and is caught on a cheetal skin, or square 



of cloth. A family of five— a man and his wife and three 
children— working from sunrise to sunset can, when the crop 
is plentiful, collect four pounds of powder worth from one to 
two rupees, according to the market price. The powder is used 
in India and the Middle East for dyeing wool, and until 
dishonest middlemen started adulterating kamala with brick 
dust, it was extensively used in the United States for colouring 
butter. The powder is also used for medicinal purposes, and 
mustard oil in which runi berries have been boiled is used for 
rheumatism. 

Interspersed with the shisham saplings and runi trees, are 
feathery-leaved khair trees. These khair trees in addition to 
providing the foothill villages with plowshares, provide a 
cottage industry for tens of thousands of poor people in the 
United Provinces. The industry, which is a winter one and is 
carried on day and night for a period of four months, produces 
a commodity known locally as kach, and to commerce as 
catechu. It also produces— as a by-product— the dye known as 
khaki, used for dyeing cloth and fishing nets. A friend of mine, 
a man by the name of Mirza, was, I believe, the first to discover 
khaki dye, and the discovery was accidental. Mirza was one day 
leaning over an iron pan in which khair chips were being 
boiled, to make kach, when a white handkerchief he was 
carrying fell into the pan. Fishing the handkerchief out with a 
stick Mirza sent it to the wash. When the handkerchief was 
brought back Mirza found it had not lost any of its colour, so, 
reprimanding the washerman, he told hirn to take it away and 
clean it. Returning with the handkerchief the washerman said 
he had tried every method known to his trade of removing 
stains, but he could not take the colour out of the small square 
of linen. It was thus that Mirza found he had discovered a fast 
dye, which is now produced in the flourishing factory he 
erected at Izattnagar. 

Mingled with the many shades of green— for each tree has its 
own individual colour— are vivid splashes of orange, gold, lilac, 
pink, and red. The trees with orange coloured flowers 



are dhank (Butea Giondosa) which produces a ruby-coloured 
gum used for dyeing silk of the finest quality The trees with the 
three-foot-long showers of golden bloom are amaltas (Cassia 
Fistula). The two-foot-long cylindrical seedpods of this tree 
contain a sweet jelly like substance which is used throughout 
Kumaon as a laxative. The trees with the big lilac coloured 
flowers arc kachanar (Bauhinia). The pink are kusum trees and 
the mass of pink shading from delicate shell to deep rose, are 
not flowers but tender young leaves. The red are samal (silk 
cotton) trees the flowers of which are loved by all birds that 
drink nectar, and by paroquets and monkeys that eat the fleshy 
flowers, and by deer and pigs that eat them when they fall to 
the ground. Later in the year the samal flowers will give way to 
large woody seedpods. When the hot winds blow in April these 
pods will explode like antiaircraft shells and a white cloud of 
silk cotton (kapoc used in life-belts), each section carrying a 
seed, will drift away in the wind to regenerate nature's garden. 
All seeds that are not carried from one place to another by 
birds or animals are provided with buoyant material or with 
parchment sails or propellers, to enable the winds of heaven to 
carry them from place to place. There are, of course, 
exceptions, one of which is the gotail which bears a fruit like a 
small green apple and which no bird or animal eats. This tree 
grows on the banks of rivers and the water does for its seeds 
what birds and animals, and the wind, do for other seeds. 
Another is the coconut, which is provided with a husk that 
enables it to float and be carried by the ocean waves from 
shore to shore. 

Beyond the canal, our starting-point, is our village. The vivid 
green and gold patches show where the young wheat is 
sprouting, and where the mustard crop is in full flower. The 
white line at the foot of the village is the boundary wall, which 
took ten years to build, and beyond the wall the forest 
stretches in an unbroken line until it merges into the horizon. 

To the east and to the west as far as the eye can see is limitless 
forest, and behind us the hills rise ridge upon ridge to the 



eternal snows. 


Here as we sit in this beautiful and peaceful spot in the shadow 
of the mighty Himalayas, with the forest round us putting on a 
new mantle of spring, with every current of wind bringing with 
it the sweet smell of flowers, and with the air throbbing with 
the joyful songs of a great multitude of birds, we can forget for 
a spell the strains and stresses of our world, and savour the 
world of the jungle folk. For here the law of the jungle prevails. 
The law that is older and infinitely better than man-made laws. 
The law that permits each individual to live his own life, and 
that anticipates no troubles or sorrows for the mororw. 

Dangers there are for all, but those dangers only add zest to 
life, and while keeping every individual alert and on its toes, 
take nothing from the joy of living. And that there is joy all 
round you, who can now pin-point sound, recognize every bird 
and animal from its call, and assign a reason for the call, have 
ample proof. Away to our left a peacock is screaming his 
mating call and from that call you know he is dancing, with tail- 
feathers spread, to impress a bevy of admiring hens. Nearer at 
hand a jungle-cock is crowing defiance to all and sundry and is 
being answered by others of his kind who are equally defiant. 
But of fights there are few, for to fight in the jungle exposes the 
contestants to danger. Away to our right a sambhar stag is 
warning the jungle folk that the leopard we saw an hour ago is 
lying out on an exposed spot basking in the sun. The stag will 
bell until the leopard retires for the day into heavy cover, 
where he will be screened from the prying eyes of informants. 

In a thicket below us twenty or more white-eyed tits, white¬ 
winged bulbuls, and grey headed flycatchers, have found a 
spotted owlet dozing in a leafy bower and are calling to 
companions to come and see what they have found. They know 
it is safe to approach and scream into the wise one's very ears, 
for only when he has young will he occasionally kill in daylight. 
And the owlet on his part knows that no matter how much he is 
feared and hated by his tormentors, he has nothing to fear from 
them, and that when they tire of their sport they will leave him 



to his sleep. In the air all round there is sound, and each sound 
has a meaning. The liquid notes, the most beautiful of all the 
songs to be heard in our jungles, is a shama wooing a bashful 
mate. The tap-tap-tapping is a golden-backed woodpecker 
making a hole in a dead tree for his new home. The harsh 
braying is a cheetal stag challenging a rival to battle. High in 
the heavens a serpent eagle is screaming, and higher still a 
flight of vultures are patiently quartering the sky. Yesterday, 
first a Himalyan blue magpie, and then a pair of crows, showed 
the vultures where a tiger had hidden his kill in a thicket near 
where the peacock is now dancing, and today as they circle and 
soar they are hoping for the same good fortune. 

As you sit here, alone or in company with a friend, you can 
realize to the full what your knowledge of jungle lore means to 
you, and how greatly that knowledge has added to your 
confidence and to your pleasure. No longer does the jungle 
hold any terrors for you, for you know there is nothing for you 
to be afraid of. If the necessity arose you could live on the 
jungles, and you could lie down whereever you were and sleep 
without any feeling of unease. You have learnt to maintain 
direction, to be conscious at all times of wind direction, and 
you will never again lose yourself in the jungle no matter 
whether you move by night or by day. Hard though it was at 
first to train your eyes, you know now that your field of vision is 
180 degrees and that every movement in that field will be seen 
by you. You can enter into the lives of all the jungle folk, for you 
have learnt their language; and being able to locate sound, you 
can follow their every movement. You can now move silently, 
and shoot accurately, and if the necessity ever arose again for 
you to face an enemy in the jungles you would not face him 
with an inferiority complex, but with the lull knowledge that no 
matter what his reputation you are a better-trained man than 
he is, and have nothing to learn or to fear from him. 

It is now time to wend our way home, for we have a long way to 
go, and Maggie will be waiting breakfast for us. We will return 
the way we came and as we pass the strip of sand on which we 



counted the cheetaltracks, the path by which the leopard 
crossed the watercourse, the fine silt washed down from the 
foothills, and the passage-way under the aqueduct, we will drag 
a branch behind us. This we will do to obliterate our tracks, 
and all the tracks we saw this morning so that when we visit 
the jungle again tomorrow, the next clay, or maybe the day 
after, we will know that all the tracks we see date from the time 
we last passed that way 



Chapter Twelve 

WHILE ABSORBING JUNGLE LORE IT is possible to develop a 
sense that has been handed down to us from the days of 
primitive man and which, for want of a better name, I shall call. 
Jungle Sensitiveness. This sense, which can be acquired only by 
living in the jungles in close association with wild life, is the 
development of the subconscious warning of danger. 

Many individuals can testify to having avoided trouble by 
acting on an impulse that came how they knew not, and that 
warned their subconscious being against an impending danger. 
In one case the warning may have been against proceeding 
along a certain street in which a moment later a bomb 
exploded; in another, moving just in time from the vicinity of a 
building wrecked a second later by a shell; or in yet another, 
strpping away from the shelter of a tree which a moment later 
was struck by lightning. 

Whatever the danger may have been that the impulse enabled 
the individual to avoid, it was a known and 
an anticipated danger. In the story of the Chowgarh man-eater 
I have given two instances of subconscious warning. At the 
time the warning was conveyed to me the whole of my 
attention was concentrated on avoiding being killed by the 
man-eater, and the warning I received that danger of an attack 
from a man-eater threatened— in the one case from a piled-up 
heap of rocks, and in the other from an overhanging rock under 
which I had to pass— was therefore quite natural and 
understandable. I should now like to give one instance 
of unconscious warning of unsuspected danger, which I can 
only explain as resulting from highly developed jungle 
sensitiveness. 

It was my custom during the winter months at Kaladhungi to 
shoot an occasional sambbar or cheetal stag for the tenants of 
our village. One afternoon a deputation arrived to remind me 
that I had shot no meat for some time, and to request me to 
shoot a cheetal to celebrate a local festival on the morrow. The 



jungles were very dry at the time, making stalking difficult, and 
the sun had set before I found and shot the stag I was looking 
for. Deciding that it was too late to bring in the deer that night 
I covered it up to give it a measure of protection against 
leopard, bear and pig and made for home, intending to return 
with a carrying party early next morning. 

My shot had been heard in the village and I found ten or a 
dozen men waiting for me on the steps of our cottage, equipped 
with ropes and a stout bamboo pole. In reply to their questions 
I told them I had shot the deer they wanted, and added that if 
they met me at the village gate at sunrise next morning I would 
take them to where I had covered it up. The men had come 
prepared to bring in the deer that night and they said that if I 
would tell them where the dear was they would go out and try 
to find it for themselves. On the previous occasions on which I 
had shot deer for the village, I had laid a trail. The men knew 
the jungles as well as I did and all the information they needed, 
when I shot meat for them, was the position of the mark I had 
made on fire-track, game-path, or cattle-track, and from this 
mark they would follow the trail I had laid. This system of 
recovering an animal had never failed, but on the present 
occasion, having shot the deer late in the evening and there 
being no moon, I had not laid a trail. The men were anxious to 
divide up the deer that night in preparation for the feast on the 
morrow, and as I did not wish to disappoint them I told them to 
go up the Powalgarh fire-track for two and a half miles and 
wait for me at the foot of an old haldu tree that was a landmark 
known to all of us. So while the men streamed out of the 
compound I sat down to a cup of tea Maggie had brewed for 
me. 

A man walking alone can cover the ground much faster than a 
body of men walking in Indian file, so I did not hurry over my 
tea, and when I picked up my rifle to follow the men it was 
quite dark. I had walked a good few miles between sunrise and 
sunset that day but being as fit as man could be an additional 
five or six miles meant nothing to me. The men had a good start 



but they were still some distance from the haldu tree when I 
caught them up. I had no difficulty in finding the deer, and 
when the men had lashed it to the bamboo pole I took them 
back by a short cut which reduced the distance by half a mile. 

It was dinner-time when I got back to our cottage, and telling 
Maggie I would postpone my bath until bedtime, I asked her to 
call for dinner while I had a wash. 

When undressing to have my bath that night I was very 
surprised to find that my light rubber-soled shoes were full of 
red dust, and that my feet were coated with it. I am very 
careful of my feet and have in consequence never suffered from 
any form of foot trouble, and I could not understand how I had 
been so careless as to get my feet all messed up. Small things 
have a habit of nagging at the memory and the memory in turn 
nags at the nerves that control the cells in which information is 
stored, and then, suddenly and without any conscious effort on 
our part the information we are seeking— be it the name of a 
person, or of a place, or as in the present case the reason for 
my messed-up feet— is presented to us. 

The old trunk road which carried all the traffic to the hills 
before the railway to Kathgodam was built, runs in a straight 
line from our gate to the Boar bridge. Three hundred yards 
beyond the bridge the road turns to the left. On the right-hand 
side of this turn the road, at the time I am writing of, was met 
by the Powalgarh fire-track which for a few hundred yards 
followed the alignment of the present Powalgarh motor road. 
Fifty yards from the Boar bridge the trunk road is met on the 
right by the Kota road coming down from the north. Between 
the junction of these two roads and the turn, the road runs 
through a shallow depression. Heavy cart traffic had churned 
up the red earth in the depression, resulting in the road at this 
point being six inches deep in dust. To avoid walking in the 
dust the foot traffic had trodden a narrow path between the 
dusty road and the jungle on the left. Thirty yards on the near 
side of the turn, the road and the narrow footpath ran over a 
small culvert which had parapet walls a foot thick and eighteen 



inches high, to prevent carts running off the road. The culvert 
had ceased to function many years previously and at the lower 
end of it, i.e. the end nearer the narrow footpath, there was a 
bed of sand eight or ten feet sguare on a level with the road. 

The information concerning my dirty feet that had been 
brought back to memory was, that when following my men 
after tea I had left the narrow footpath a few yards on the near 
side of the culvert; crossed the road from left to right through 
the six-inch-deep dust; skirted along the right-hand edge of the 
road and after passing over the culvert, recrossed the road, 
and continued along the footpath. Why had I done this? From 
the time I left our cottage, to the time I overtook the men near 
the haldu tree, I had not heard a single sound that had given 
me even the suspicion of uneasiness, and I had seen nothing, 
for it was a dark night. Why then had I crossed the road, and 
after passing over the culvert, recrossed it? 

I have stated earlier in this book that from the day I traced the 
terrifying sound made by Dansay's banshee as the friction of 
two smooth surfaces, I have made a hobby of finding a reason 
for every unusual thing I have heard or seen in the jungles. 
Well, here was something unusual, something that needed an 
explanation, so before there was any traffic on the road next 
morning I went out to try to get the explanation. 

The men after leaving our gate the previous evening had gone 
down the road in a bunch and had been joined at the village 
gate by an additional three men, bringing the number to 
fourteen. 

After crossing the Boar bridge the party had proceeded along 
the footpath in Indian file, crossed the culvert, and at the turn 
crossed from the left to the right of the road, and gone up the 
fire-track. Shortly thereafter, a tiger came down the Kota road, 
scratched up the ground near a bush at the junction of the two 
roads, crossed the trunk road, and proceeded along the 
footpath. Here the tiger's pug marks were superimposed on the 
footprints of my men. When the tiger had proceeded along the 



footpath for about thirty yards, I came over the bridge. 

The bridge is an iron one and quite evidently the tiger heard 
me crossing it, for I was walking fast and making no attempt to 
go silently When the tiger found I was not going up the Kota 
road, but was coming in his direction, he hurried down the 
footpath and, leaving it at the culvert, lay down on the patch of 
sand facing the road and with his head a yard from the 
footpath. I followed the tiger down the footpath and when I was 
within five yards of the culvert I turned to the right, crossed 
the road through the six-inch-deep dust, skirted along the right 
edge of the road, and after passing over the culvert recrossed 
the road to the footpath. And this I had done unconsciously, to 
avoid passing within a yard of the tiger. 

I believe that if I had continued along the footpath I could have 
passed the tiger with perfect safety provided (a) that I had 
proceeded steadily on my way, (b) that I had made no vocal 
sound, (c) that I had made no violent movement. The tiger had 
no intention of killing me, but if at the moment of passing him I 
had stopped to listen to any jungle sound, or had coughed or 
fanned or blown my nose, or had thrown the rifle from one 
shoulder to the other, there was a chance that the tiger would 
have got nervous and attacked me. My subconscious being was 
not prepared to take this risk and jungle sensitiveness came to 
my assistance and guided me away from the potential danger. 

On how many occasions jungle sensitiveness has enabled me to 
avoid dangers of one kind or another it is not possible for me to 
say, but from the fact that in all the years I have lived in the 
jungles I have only once come in actual contact with a wild 
animal is proof that some sense, call it jungle sensitiveness, or 
call it my Guardian Angel, has intervened at the critical 
moment to ensure my safety. 


-END- 



BOOK STX: 

TREE. TOPS 




Introduction 

by Lord Haileyi. Governor of the United Provinces, 1928- 
1934. 

JIM CORBETT'S story of the visit paid by Her Majesty the 
Queen to Tree Tops in 1952 was written only a short time 
before his sudden death in Kenya on 19 April 1955. He was 
then nearing his eightieth year. When he had visited England in 
1951 he had shown few signs of his age, but he had in fact 
never fully recovered from the effects of the severe illness from 
which he had suffered in Central India, in the course of training 
British troops in jungle fighting before they took part in the 
Burma Campaign. 

I do not know how far the picture formed of him by his readers 
differs from that which will live in the memory of his friends. In 
one respect perhaps the reader who has known him through 
his books may have some advantage over them. He seldom 
spoke of the hardships and dangers of those encounters with 
man-eaters which gave such an incomparable thrill to his 
record of them. He felt, I think, that these were matters which 
lay between him and the great beasts whose strength and 
courage he respected, and whose lapses into ways that were a 
menace to man he could in due season forget. 

Many of his acquaintances probably failed to realize that the 
name and deeds of this quiet and unassuming man were a 
household word among the hillfolk of the scattered hamlets of 
Kumaon. I doubt indeed if he would ever have given to the 
world the earliest of his books. Man-eaters of Kumaon, in 1944, 
had he not hoped that its publication might contribute 
something to the funds of St. Dunstan's, which had in the 
previous year opened a training school for blinded Indian 
soldiers. I remember how modest was his own estimate of what 
this contribution might be. He did not realize how enthralling 
were the stories he had to tell, nor how greatly their interest 
would be enhanced by his manner of telling them. Yet, as the 
world was soon to acknowledge, he possessed, in fact, that 



supreme art of narrative which owes nothing to conscious 
artistry. 

Since, however, he is necessarily the centre of his own stories, 
they have much to reveal of his own history and way of life. 
Those who have read My India and Jungle Lore will not need to 
be told that he was one of a large family and was brought up 
during the summer months at the Himalayan hill station of 
Naini Tal, and in the winter on the small property held by his 
family at Kaladhungi in the foothills below it. Sport was in his 
blood, and from boyhood he set himself to gain that intimacy 
with the jungle and its life that he would need if he was to 
enjoy such sport as his modest means allowed. He never forgot 
in after life the habit which he then taught himself of noiseless 
movement in the jungle nor his rare understanding of its sights 
and sounds, and it was then that he began to acquire that 
unique combination of speed and accuracy in the use of the 
rifle to which he was later to owe so much. One who knew him 
at that period has said, however, that even in his youth he took 
no special pride in this achievement. Good shooting was to him 
an obligation rather than an accomplishment. If things were to 
be killed, then this should be done instantly, and without pain 
to them. 

As soon as he left school at Naini Tal, he found employment 
with the Railway Department, at first in small posts but 
afterwards in charge of the transport at Mokameh Ghat, where 
the Ganges River created a broad gap between the two railway 
systems. There is a great bridge over the river now, but at that 
time more than half a million tons of traffic were ferried across 
it every year, and had to be transhipped from one gauge of rails 
to another. The conditions of work were exceptionally arduous, 
and that he carried it on for over twenty years was due not only 
to his power of physical endurance, but to his friendly personal 
contacts with the large force of Indian labour which he 
employed as contractor. They gave an unmistakable proof of 
their own feelings for him during the First World War. He 
helped to raise a Kumaon Labour Corps for service overseas. 



and took his section of it to France. It was then that his Indian 
subordinates at Mokameh Ghat arranged with the labourers 
that they would together carry on the work on his behalf 
throughout his absence. In the War he was given the 
substantive rank of Major in the Indian Army. 

The nature of the work during these years gave him little 
leisure for sport, but during his holidays in Kumaon he was 
able on three occasions to answer the calls which were made 
on him for his help against man-eaters. Between the years 
1907 and 1911 he disposed of the Champawat and Muktesar 
man-eaters and the Panar leopard. The first and last of these 
marauders were believed to have killed between them no fewer 
than 886 human beings, and they were perhaps the worst of 
the man-eaters from which Kumaon suffered in our generation, 
though others of a later date became more notorious. The 
leopard of Rudraprayag, for instance, which was officially 
recorded to have killed 150 human beings, acquired so wide a 
reputation in India because it preyed on the pilgrims who 
followed the route to a well-known Hindu shrine. 

With his retirement from his work at Mokameh Ghat there 
began a new chapter in his life. He was now his own master. 

His requirements were simple; he was unmarried, but he had 
at Naini Tal and Kaladhungi the devoted companionship of two 
sisters, one of whom (the Maggie to whom he so often refers) 
has survived him. It was now that there occurred the majority 
of the encounters with man-eaters of which he has written in 
his books. The passing of the years did nothing to diminish the 
energy or the courage which he devoted to this task. The 
disposal of the Rudraprayag leopard, with its long tale of hard 
living and of sleepless nights, when Corbett was almost as 
often the hunted as the hunter, took place when he was fifty- 
one. The killing of the Thak tiger occurred when he was sixty- 
three. There seemed to be no limit to his endurance of fatigue 
or his ability to meet unruffled what seemed to be misfortune 
or mishap. 



But there was another aspect also in the life which he now led. 
It seemed that sport, in the sense that the word is commonly 
used, had ceased to hold first place with him. So far as he was 
concerned, the tiger and the leopard at all events were 
immune, unless they were taking human life. Often when he 
and I were together, we were visited by deputations of the 
hillfolk asking for help; to be more correct, it was he that they 
sought out. He it was, as all their world knew, who had so often 
ventured his own life to save others in Kumaon from a Terror 
which filled their days and nights with fear. There was indeed 
here something that passed the ordinary bounds of human fear, 
for the ways of the ancient gods of the hills are unpredictable, 
and who could tell that the Terror was not a visitation from 
them? But the rubric that Corbett applied to the inquisition 
which was now opened was strict, however friendly and 
considerate in its terms. It was no use for them to plead their 
losses in cattle or goats. The tiger was lord of the jungle and 
must have its dues. Not until he himself was convinced that a 
tiger had been killing human beings, not by chance or in anger, 
but because it sought them as food, would he agree to come to 
their help. 

One noticed, too, that the keen observation of jungle life that 
had once seemed to minister to sport now became of increasing 
interest for its own sake. There could be nothing more 
enjoyable than to spend in his company long days on the 
hillside or in the jungle, where every twisted twig, every call of 
bird or animal, seemed to carry its own meaning to him; or, if 
the interpretation was not at once clear, would provide him 
with matter for most engaging speculation. For him, this was 
not nature study, it was his world, and these were the things 
that meant life and death to its inhabitants. Photography 
became of greater concern than shooting. I recall an occasion 
when I chanced on him as he emerged in some apparent 
disorder from a tangled thicket in the jungle near Kaladhungi. 
He explained that he had been trying to get a picture of a 
tigress, but she was in a bad temper, and as often as he went 



into the thicket she drove him out again. He added, however, as 
one who was ready to make due allowances, that she had her 
cubs with her. This seemed to be typical of the terms on winch 
he now stood with the animals of Kumaon. There was an 
understanding which would justify the tigress in demonstrating 
against the intrusion on her nursery. But the matter need not 
be carried further. 

When during the Second World War he gave the Government 
his services in training troops in jungle fighting, he received 
the honorary rank of Lieutenant-Colonel, and in 1946 there was 
conferred on him the distinction of the Companionship of the 
Indian Empire. The Government had previously allowed him a 
privilege which he valued very highly when it gave him the 
'freedom of the jungle', or, in other words, the liberty of entry 
to all its Forest Reserves. I do not need to speak here of the 
regard in which he came to be held by the people of Kumaon. 

As kindly and generous as he was fearless, he gave freely of 
himself, and asked nothing in return. But I think that in the 
olden days he would have been one of the small band of 
Europeans whose memory has been worshipped by Indians as 
that of men who were in some measure also gods. 

When so many of his friends left India in 1947, he and his sister 
decided to leave also, and made their home at Nyeri in Kenya. 

It could not have been an easy decision for him to make. He 
loved his home in Kaladhungi as greatly as he was himself 
beloved by its villagers. But Kenya could at all events minister 
to his passion for photographing wild life, and he was able to 
indulge it to the full. The proximity of Tree Tops to Nyeri made 
him a frequent visitor there, and it is pleasant to know that we 
have now his own story of the visit of Her Majesty the Queen to 
Tree Tops, for the letters which he wrote at the time to his 
friends showed how very deeply moved he was by his 
experiences as a member of her party. 

London HAILEY 
September 1955 



Tree Tops 

A BRILLIANT sun was shining in a deep blue sky and the air 
was crisp and invigorating, on that fifth day of February 1952. 

I was standing on a wooden platform, thirty feet above ground, 
and before me stretched an oval-shaped clearing in the forest, 
two hundred yards long and a hundred yards wide. A miniature 
lake with tall tufts of grass dotted on it occupied two-thirds of 
this open space, the rest consisted of a salt-lick. On the farther 
margin of the lake a snow-white heron stood motionless, 
waiting patiently for the approach of unwary frogs, and in the 
open water in front of it a pair of dabchicks were taking their 
young brood of four, which looked no bigger than marbles, on 
what was evidently their first ex-cursion into a danger-filled 
world. On the salt-lick a solitary rhino was moving restlessly, 
occasionally stooping to lick the salt ground and then throwing 
his head to snuff the wind that was blowing down towards him 
from the forest. 

The lake and the salt-lick were surrounded on three sides by 
dense tree forests and on the fourth, and farthest from me, by a 
hundred-yard-wide strip of grass which came right down to the 
margin of the lake. Beyond the strip of grass, and forming a 
frame for it, was a belt of Cape Chestnuts. These chestnuts 
were in full bloom, and sporting among the blue tinged with 
purple flowers was a troop of colobus monkeys winch, with 
their flowing white tails and long white mantles hanging from 
their shoulders, looked like giant butterflies as they flitted from 
tree to tree. A more beautiful and a more peaceful scene it 
would not have been possible to conceive; and yet not all was 
peace, for in the dense forest beyond the monkeys was a herd 
of elephants and in the herd was discord. Every few minutes 
the air was rent by loud trumpeting mingled with the 
screaming and deep rumbling of angry elephants. As the 
sounds of strife drew nearer, the monkeys collected in a group 
and after barking in alarm flitted away over the tree-tops, led 
by a mother who had a young babe clinging to her breast. The 



solitary rhino now decided his need of salt had been met and 
snorting his defiance he turned in one movement, as only a 
rhino can turn, and with head held high and tail in the air, 
trotted into the forest on the left. Only the heron, still patient 
and unrewarded, and the family of dabchicks, remained 
unaffected by the approaching herd. Presently out of the dense 
forest the elephants began to appear, not in Indian file but on a 
broad front of fifty yards. Silent now, and unhurried, in twos 
and threes they drifted on to the bush-dotted strip of grass, 
while my eyes ranged back and forth until I had counted forty- 
seven. The last to come into the open were three bulls, one 
quite evidently the master of the herd and the other two 
younger brothers, or possibly sons, who were approaching the 
time when they would wrest the mastery of the herd from their 
elder, and drive him into exile. 

At the far end of the platform on which I was standing a short 
flight of steps led up into the hut which is known to all the 
world as 'Tree Tops'. The hut is built in the upper branches of a 
giant ficus tree and is only accessible by a steep and narrow 
thirty-foot-long ladder. Time was when, for the safety of the 
occupants of the hut, the foot of the ladder was cranked by a 
winch into the upper branches of an adjoining tree, but this 
safety device had long since been discontinued. The 
accommodation of the hut consisted of a dining-room, in one 
corner of which was recessed a wood-burning stove, three 
bedrooms for visitors, a narrow slip of a room for the White 
Hunter, and a long open balcony provided with comfortable 
cushioned seats. From the balcony there was a clear and 
uninterrupted view of the miniature lake, the salt-lick, and of 
the forest beyond, with the Aberdare mountains in the 
background rising to a height of 14,000 feet. 

* * * 

PRINCESS ELIZABETH and the Duke of Edinburgh had arrived 
at the Royal Lodge, Sagana, twenty miles from Nyeri, two days 
before, and on that February morning I had just finished 



shaving when I received a breath-taking telephone message 
informing me that Her Royal Highness had been graciously 
pleased to invite me to accompany her to Tree Tops. The Royal 
Party were to leave the Lodge at 1 p.m. and, driving slowly 
arrive at 2 p.m. at Tree Tops where I was to meet them. 

Nyeri has one of the finest polo grounds in Kenya and the 
previous day a match in which the Duke had taken part had 
been played there, with the Princess watching. The polo 
ground is eight miles from Nyeri and fifteen miles from the 
Royal Lodge, and is surrounded on three sides by forest and 
high grass. Neither my sister Maggie nor I feel happy in a 
crowd, so while the populace from far and wide was collecting 
at the polo ground for the great event, we motored to a bridge 
spanning a deep ravine which runs through dense forest 
towards the ground. Though a state of emergency had not up 
to that time been declared, security measures were being 
taken, for the unrest had started and there had been in the 
neighbourhood a number of cases of arson about which the 
press, for obvious reasons, had kept silent. I was uneasy about 
the deep ravine which afforded an easy approach to the polo 
ground. However, on examining the stretches of sand in it I was 
relieved to find no footprints, so we spent the rest of the 
evening near the bridge, keeping watch on the ravine. This 
accounts for our absence from the polo match. 

* * * 

AFTER receiving the telephone message I shaved a second 
time, had breakfast, and then went to the administrative 
headquarters to get a road pass, for I had to use the road that 
had been closed for the Royal Party. At midday I motored eight 
miles along the main road and, leaving it at the polo ground, 
took a rough track which runs for two miles up a narrow valley 
to the foot of the Tree Tops hill. Here, where the track ends and 
a narrow footpath winds up the hill through dense cover for six 
hundred yards to Tree Tops, I removed my handbag and British 
warm from the car, and sent it back to Nyeri. To a number of 



trees adjoining the path, slats of wood had been nailed to form 
ladders as a means of escape in the event of attack by 
elephants, rhino, or buffaloes. It is a sobering fact that two 
days after that path had been traversed by the Princess and her 
party, four of the biggest trees to which ladders were nailed 
were uprooted by elephants. 

* * * 

IT was now 1.30 p.m. on that fifth day of February, and 2 p.m. 
was zero hour. The elephants, still silent and peaceful, were 
quietly browsing on the grass and bushes while slowly drifting 
down towards the lake, and it was possible to observe them 
more closely. They were of all sizes and of all ages, and five of 
the cows were accompanied by calves only a few weeks old. 
These five cows, and the three bulls, who were in that seasonal 
condition known as 'must 7 , were a potential danger. However, if 
the herd remained on the far side of the lake for another thirty 
minutes, all would be well. The minutes dragged by, as they do 
in times of strain, and when only fifteen remained the 
elephants started to edge down towards the salt-lick. This salt¬ 
lick extended to within a few yards of the ficus tree, and from 
the projecting balcony it was possible to drop a handkerchief 
on to any animal on the lick below. Between the lick and the 
tree a few small branches had been laid, to form a screen for 
people approaching the ladder leading to the hut above. These 
branches had been crushed down by elephants and other 
animals and, at the time I am writing of, the screen was a 
screen only in name. 

On the platform, with the passing of every moment, my anxiety 
was growing. The herd of forty-seven elephants was crowded 
together on the salt-lick. It was zero hour and the Royal Party, 
if it was up to time, would now be on the path, and at that 
moment the big bull elephant, annoyed by the attention the two 
young bulls were paying to one of the cows, charged them and 
all three enraged animals dashed into the forest on the left, 
trumpeting and screaming with rage, and started to circle 



round at the back of Tree Tops, and in the direction of the 
path. Would the escort with the Royal Party on hearing the 
elephants, decide that it was too dangerous to go forward and 
so return to the comparative safety of the open ground where 
they had alighted from their cars, or would they take the risk of 
trying to reach the ladder leading up to the hut? Crossing the 
platform, I peered into the forest. From the foot of the ladder 
the path ran for forty yards in a straight line, and then curved 
out of sight to the left. Terrifying sounds were to be heard in 
plenty but nothing was to be seen on the path, and there was 
nothing that could be done. Presently I caught sight of a man 
carrying a rifle at the ready, followed closely by a small trim 
figure. The party had arrived, and on reaching the bend in the 
path, from where the elephants on the salt-lick were in full 
view, came to a halt. No time was to be lost, so, slipping down 
the ladder, I approached the small figure which, from her 
photographs, I recognized as Princess Elizabeth. Smiling her 
greeting, and without a moment's hesitation, the Princess 
walked unhurriedly straight towards the elephants which were 
now crowded at the hut end of the salt-lick, and within ten 
yards of the foot of the ladder. Handing her handbag and 
camera to me, the Princess climbed the steep ladder, followed 
by Lady Pamela Mountbatten, the Duke, and Commander 
Parker. The escort, led by Edward Windley, then turned and 
retraced their steps down the footpath. 

In the course of a long lifetime I have seen some courageous 
acts, but few to compare with what I witnessed on that fifth day 
of February. The Princess and her companions, who had never 
previously been on foot in an African forest, had set out that 
glorious day to go peacefully to Tree Tops and, from the 
moment they left, their ears had been assailed— as they told 
me later— by the rampaging of angry elephants. In single file, 
and through dense bush where visibility in places was limited 
to a yard or two, they went towards those sounds, which grew 
more awe-inspiring the nearer they approached them. And 
then, when they came to the bend in the path and within sight 



of the elephants, they found that they would have to approach 
within ten yards of them to reach the safety of the ladder. A 
minute after climbing the ladder the Princess was sitting on the 
balcony and, with steady hands, was filming the elephants. 

It was not usual for elephants to be seen at Tree Tops at that 
time of the day and, while they were being filmed, they did all 
that elephants could be expected to do. The old bull returned to 
the herd, followed at a respectful distance by the two young 
bulls, and he again chased them away, to the accompaniment of 
loud trumpeting and angry screaming. A flock of doves alighted 
on an open patch of ground, and on seeing them one of the 
elephants filled its trunk with dust and, cautiously approaching, 
discharged the dust at them, for all the world like a man 
discharging a gun loaded with black powder. The doves were 
doing no harm and it was out of sheer mischief that the 
elephant frightened them away, for after doing so it flicked its 
trunk up and down as if laughing and flapped its ears with 
delight. The Duke witnessed this side-play with great 
amusement and when the doves returned and the same 
elephant, or it may have been another, again sucked dust into 
its trunk and approached the birds he drew the Princess's 
attention to the scene, which she filmed. A cow elephant now 
came towards us with the smallest of the calves close to her 
side. Stopping a few yards in front of the balcony the mother 
pressed the damp tip of her trunk on to the salt-impregnated 
dust, and then conveyed it to her mouth. The calf, taking 
advantage of its mother's preoccupation, inserted its head 
under her left foreleg and started to suckle. Greatly interested 
in this filial scene the Princess, who had her eye to her cine¬ 
camera, exclaimed, 'Oh, look. It is going to drive the baby 
away! 1 This was said as a small elephant, three or four years of 
age, trotted up to the mother and inserting its head under her 
right foreleg, also started to feed. The mother stood perfectly 
still while the meal was in progress and when the baby and its 
elder sister had had enough, or possibly when there was no 
more to be had, the mother disengaged herself and passing 



under the balcony; accompanied by the baby went out on to a 
spit of land jutting into the lake. Here she had a drink, sucking 
the water into her trunk, raising her head, and pouring it down 
her throat. After guenching her thirst she walked into the lake 
for a few yards and then stood still. Left to itself the baby got 
nervous and started to squeal in a thin small voice. To the cry 
for help the mother paid not the least attention, for this was a 
lesson that it was safe for the young to follow where the mother 
led. Eventually the baby summoned sufficient courage to wade 
into the water, and when it was within reach the mother 
tenderly drew it to her and, supporting it with her trunk, gently 
propelled it to the far bank. 

When watching a herd of elephants it is intensely interesting to 
see how kind they are to the young. Bored with standing about 
while their elders are feeding, the young play about and get in 
the way. When this happens, even with great terrifying-looking 
bulls, the young are gently put aside, and are never struck or 
trodden on. Of all the animals in the wild, elephants have the 
most real family or herd life. When a female retires for 
maternity reasons the elders of her own sex are always on hand 
to keep her company and to protect the young, and until the 
new arrival is able to walk the herd remains in the vicinity. If 
young or old get into difficulties or are threatened with danger, 
real or imaginary, the others rally round to give what help they 
can. It is for this reason that herds in which there are young 
are avoided, and it was for the same reason that the approach 
to the ladder was dangerous, for if the wind had changed, or if 
a nervous cow with a very young calf had seen the party, there 
would have been grave risk of an attack. Fortunately the wind 
did not change and by approaching the elephants unhurriedly 
and noiselessly the Princess and her companions avoided 
detection. 

Karra, a big male baboon who had recently lost a part of his 
upper lip in a fight, which gave him a very sinister look, now 
led his family of eleven down a forest track to the edge of the 
salt-lick. Here they halted, for elephants dislike baboons and I 



have seen them chase such a family into trees and then shake 
the trees in an attempt to dislodge them. Karra was taking no 
risks on this occasion. After surveying the scene he led his 
family back into the forest and, circling round the salt-lick, 
approached the ficus tree from the left. A bold young female 
now left the family and, climbing one of the wooden supports of 
the hut, arrived on the balcony. Running along the railing, and 
avoiding dislodging the cameras and field-glasses placed on it, 
she gained a branch of the ficus tree jutting out from the hut. 
Here she was rewarded with a sweet potato nearly as big as 
her head and while she sat contentedly peeling it with her 
teeth was filmed and photographed at a range of a few feet. 

* * * 

TIME slipped by unnoticed, and when the Princess was told 
that tea was ready in the dining- room, she said, 'Oh, please 
may I have it here? I don't want to miss one moment of this/ 
While tea was being taken, the elephants drifted off the salt¬ 
lick, some going into the forest on the left, and others passing 
under the balcony and going along the shore of the lake to the 
right. The Princess had laid her tea-cup aside and was looking 
at a sheaf of photographs, when I saw two male waterbuck 
racing at full speed down a forest glade towards the salt-lick. 

On my drawing the Princess's attention to the two animals, she 
reached for her camera, and the photographs slipped from her 
lap to the floor. Saying a word or two, amply justified in the 
circumstances, the Princess got her camera to her eye just as 
the two bucks, with only a length between them, dashed with a 
great splash into the lake. When the leading one had covered 
about forty yards it stumbled over a sunken tree-stump, and 
without a moment's hesitation the one behind plunged its horns 
into it. One horn entered the unfortunate animal's left buttock, 
while the other went between its legs and into its Stomach. So 
firmly fixed were the horns that their owner was dragged 
forward for a short distance before it could free itself. The 
wounded animal plunged on until it reached the shelter of a big 
tuft of grass. Here where the water was up to its neck it halted. 



while the aggressor circled round through shallow water and 
after shaking its head in defiance walked off into the forest. 
This incident, which was evidently the final act in a battle that 
had started in the forest, had been filmed by the Princess and 
now, laying her camera aside, she picked up her field-glasses. 
Presently passing the glasses to me, she asked, 'Is that blood? 
Do you think it will die?' Yes, it was blood. The water all round 
was red with it and, judging by the laboured way in which the 
stricken animal was breathing, I said I thought it would die. 

Karra and his family, who had been joined at the salt-lick by 
five warthogs and a dainty young doe bushbuck, were now 
causing a diversion. Two teenage females were competing for 
the affections of a boy friend, whom both of them claimed, and 
this was causing angry scenes and a lot of screaming. Karra 
would have settled the dispute by chastising all three of the 
young ones if he had not at the time been contentedly lying in 
the sun— being filmed— while one of his wives ran her fingers 
through his thick fur, looking for the things that were irritating 
his skin and which it was her wifely duty to find and remove. 
While this was going on, the five warthogs were down on their 
knees cropping the short grass on the edge of the salt-lick, and 
the youngest of Karra's children was industriously trying to 
climb up the young doe's hind-legs in order to catch its tail. 
Every time an attempt was made the doe skipped aside, 
enjoying the game as much as the onlookers. 

Neither the Princess nor the Duke smokes, so, as I am addicted 
to this pernicious habit, I left my seat near the Princess and 
went to the end of the balcony, where I was presently joined by 
the Duke. In the course of our conversation I told him that I 
knew Eric Shipton, that I had read the articles in The 
Times relating to the Abominable Snowman, and that I had 
seen the photographs taken by Shipton of the footprints in the 
snow. Asked if I had any theories about the Abominable 
Snowman, I told the Duke, much to his amusement, that I did 
not believe that the tracks in the snow photographed by 
Shipton had been made by a four-legged creature, and that 



while I would not dream of accusing Shipton of a leg-pull, I had 
a suspicion that his own leg had been pulled. I went on to say 
that knowing the great interest that was being taken in the 
snowman I was disappointed that Shipton had not followed the 
tracks back to see where they had come from, and forward to 
see where they led to. This, the Duke said, was a guestion he 
himself had put to Shipton, and that Shipton had told him the 
tracks had come from the direction of windswept rocks which 
had no snow on them, and that they led to other rocks devoid of 
snow where it was not possible to follow them. 

* * * 

WITH the passage of time, the shadows were beginning to 
lengthen. More animals, more in fact than had ever before 
been seen at Tree Tops, were coining out of the forest on to the 
open ground. In the slanting rays of the sun these animals, 
together with the massed bloom of the Cape Chestnuts, 
reflected in the still waters of the lake, presented a picture of 
peace and of beauty which only an inspired artist could have 
painted, and to which no words of mine could do justice. 

On rejoining the Princess she again handed me her field- 
glasses, and said, 'I think the poor thing is dead.' The stricken 
waterbuck did indeed look dead, but presently it raised its head 
from the tuft of grass on which it was resting and, struggling to 
the bank, lay with its neck stretched out and its chin resting on 
the ground. After it had been lying without movement in this 
position for a few minutes, three elephants went up and, 
stretching out their trunks, smelt it from head to tail. Not liking 
what they smelt they shook their heads in disapproval and 
quietly walked away. From the fact that the buck had not 
reacted in any way to the presence of the elephants we 
concluded that it was now dead, so Commander Parker and I 
went to look at it. While we were going through the hut and 
climbing down the ladder, the dead animal was dragged away— 
possibly by the two leopards whose pug marks I had seen on 
the path when going to Tree Tops— for all we found on 



reaching the spot was a pool of blood. Close to the pool of 
blood was a big bush behind which the partly eaten remains of 
the waterbuck were found next day 

Throughout the afternoon and evening the Princess made 
detailed notes of all the events she had witnessed, and of all 
the animals she filmed. These notes I knew were intended as a 
running commentary for those at home who would see her 
films while she was on her visit to Australia— the visit that did 
not take place. 

As the beautiful sunset faded out of the sky and the soft light of 
the moon illuminated the scene, cameras were put away and 
we talked in hushed voices suiting our surroundings and the 
subjects we talked on. I told the Princess how grieved I had 
been to hear of her father's illness, and how greatly I rejoiced 
that he was again well enough to indulge in his favourite sport, 
bird-shooting. And I told her how distressed I had been to learn 
from the B.B.C.'s broadcast that her father had stood hatless in 
a bitter cold wind to wave to her as she left the London airport. 
On my expressing the hope that he had not caught cold, she 
said that he was like that; he never thought of himself. The 
Princess then told me of her father's long illness, their 
anxieties, their fears, their hopes, and their joy when one day 
he put his walking-stick to his shoulder and said, T believe I 
could shoot now.' This was hailed as a turning-point in his 
illness, and a token that he had taken a new grip on life. The 
Princess asked me if I had ever shot grouse, and when I told 
her I had tried to do so, with little success, she said that I 
would know how difficult they are to shoot and would therefore 
have some idea of how well the King shot when she told me 
that on the first day he went out he shot, from one butt alone, 
forty-three birds. That was more, I told her, than I had shot in a 
week from many butts. The Princess rejoined that her father 
was a very good shot. She then told me where her father had 
been shooting on that fifth day of February, and where he 
intended shooting on the following-day. 



I have heard it said, and have seen it stated, that when the 
Princess waved goodbye to His Majesty the King at the London 
airport on her departure for Australia, she knew she would 
never see him again on earth. This I do not believe. I am 
convinced that the young Princess who spoke of her father that 
night with such great affection and pride, and who expressed 
the fervent hope that she would find him quite recovered on 
her return, never had the least suspicion that she would not 
see him again. 

* * * 

DINNER was now announced and, leaving the balcony, we filed 
into the dining-room. Covers had been laid for the seven people 
present, and as I moved to the farther end of the room, the 
Princess said, 'Won't you come and sit between us?' As she said 
this, the Duke indicated the cushioned seat that had been 
prepared for him and took the uncushioned seat next to it. On 
either side of the long unpolished dining-table were benches 
made, I am sure, of the hardest wood the Duke has ever sat on. 
Eric and Lady Bettie Walker were our hosts and the sumptuous 
repast they provided was greatly appreciated, for the 
excitements of the day and the fresh clean air of the forest had 
given everyone a keen appetite. While coffee was being made 
on the table, the spirit lamp caught fire, and was swept off the 
table on to the grass-matted floor. As frantic efforts were being 
made to stamp out the blaze the African boy who had served 
dinner unhurriedly came forward, ex-tinguished the flames 
with a wet cloth, retired to his cubbyhole behind the stove, and 
a minute later replaced the lamp refilled and relit on the table. 
Not long after. Tree Tops was raided and that very efficient boy 
was carried off, together with all the bedding, provisions, 
cooking utensils, and other movable articles in the hut, and it is 
left to conjecture whether the boy's bones are bleaching in the 
African sun, or whether he became a terrorist. 

After dinner the Princess and her party returned to the balcony. 
In the dim light of the moon nine rhino could be seen on the 



salt-lick. The heron and the family of dabchicks, the elephants, 
and the other animals, had all retired and the frogs that had 
been so vocal earlier were now silent. 

Leaving the Royal Party on the balcony, where they stayed until 
the moon set, and taking my old British warm which had served 
me well during the war years, I went down and made myself 
comfortable on the top step of the thirty-foot ladder. I had 
spent so many long nights on the branches of trees that a few 
hours on the step of a ladder was no hardship; in fact it was on 
this occasion a pleasure. A pleasure to feel that I would have 
the honour of guarding for one night the life of a very gracious 
lady who, in God's good time, would sit on the throne of 
England. And after that day of days I needed to be left in 
quietness with my thoughts. 

The moon set and in the heart of the forest the night was 
intensely dark. Visibility was nil but that did not matter, for 
with the exception of a snake nothing could climb the ladder 
without my feeling the vibration. Within a few inches of my 
face, and visible against the sky through a break in the foliage 
of the ficus tree, was hanging a manila rope which went over a 
pulley and was used for hauling up baggage and provisions 
from the ground to the rooms above. Presently, and without my 
having heard a sound, this rope was agitated. Something 
moving on soft feet had laid a hand on it, or had brushed 
against it. A few tense moments passed, but there was no 
vibration on the ladder, and then the rope was agitated again 
for the second time. Possibly one of the leopards whose pug 
marks I had seen on the path had come to the ladder and on 
finding it occupied had gone away. The ladder, though steep, 
would have offered no obstacle to an animal with the climbing 
ability of a leopard, and for all I knew to the contrary the 
platform above me may have been used by leopards as an 
observation post, or as a place on which to sleep at night. In 
contrast with an Indian jungle the African forest is 
disappointingly silent at night and, except for an occasional 
quarrel among the rhinos, all I heard throughout the night was 



the mournful call of a hyena, the bark of a bushbuck, and the 
cry of a tree hyrax. 

At the first glimmer of dawn I washed and shaved, and on 
going up to the hut found the Princess sitting on the balcony 
with a meter in her hand, testing the light before making a film 
record of an old rhino that was on the salt-lick. Daylight comes 
rapidly in Africa, and when the first rays of the sun lit up the 
scene before her, the Princess started to take the picture she 
had been waiting for. While she was filming the rhino the Duke 
drew her attention to a second rhino that was coming down to 
the salt-lick. The two animals were evidently old enemies, for 
they ran at each other in a very aggressive manner and for a 
time it appeared that a great fight would be staged for the 
benefit of the Royal onlookers. 

Advancing and retreating like experienced boxers manoeuvring 
for position, the two rhinos sparred round each other until the 
newcomer decided that discretion was preferable to valour 
and, with a final snort of defiance, trotted back into the forest, 
giving the Princess an opportunity of drinking the welcome hot 
tea that Lady Bettie was handing round. 

Though she had spent so few hours in sleep the Princess had 
started that second day with eyes sparkling and a face as fresh 
as a flower. No artificial aids were needed or used to enhance 
the bloom on her cheeks. Many years previously I had stood 
one winter's day on the banks of the Ganges with the Princess's 
grandfather, and looking at her now it was easy to see from 
whom she had inherited her beautiful colouring. 

With the rhinos gone and only the white heron standing 
motionless on the margin of the lake and the family of 
dabchicks cutting furrows across its smooth surface, cameras 
and field-glasses were put away and we went to the dining¬ 
room for breakfast, which consisted of scrambled eggs and 
bacon, toast, marmalade, and coffee made this time without 
mishap, and the choicest and most luscious fruit that Africa 
could provide. There was no need now to talk in hushed voices. 



and as we finished breakfast I remarked that the Princess was 
the only member of her family who had ever slept in a tree, or 
eaten a dinner and a breakfast prepared in one. 

The escort that was to conduct the Royal Party through the 
forest to the waiting cars now arrived, led by Edward Windley, 
and as the radiantly happy Princess drove away she waved her 
hand and called out, 'I will come again. 1 Soon after her return 
to the Royal Lodge the Princess was told that her father, of 
whom she had spoken with such affection and pride, had died 
in his sleep during the previous night. 

I do not think that any two young people have ever spent such 
happy and carefree hours as Princess Elizabeth and Duke 
Philip spent at Tree Tops, from 2 p.m. on 5 February to 10 a.m. 
on 6 February. For myself, those hours that I was honoured and 
privileged to spend in their company will remain with me while 
memory lasts. 

A register is kept of visitors to Tree Tops, and of the animals 
seen. The day after the Princess visited Tree Tops the register 
was brought to me to write up. After recording the names of 
the Royal Party, the animals seen, and the incidents connected 
with them, I wrote: 

For the first time in the history of the world a young girl 
climbed into a tree one day a Princess, and after having what 
she described as her most thrilling experience she climbed 
down from the tree the next day a Queen— God bless her. 

* * * 

ALL that now remains of the ficus tree and the hut honoured by 
Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh, and visited for a 
quarter of a century by thousands of people from all parts of 
the world, is a dead and blackened stump standing in a bed of 
ashes. From those ashes a new Tree Tops will one day arise, 
and from another balcony a new generation will view other 
birds and animals. But for those of us who knew the grand old 
tree and the friendly hut. Tree Tops has gone for ever. 



NYERI 
6 April 1955 
-END- 



