ROOK FTVF.: 
JUNOT.E T ORF. 




Introduction 

IN THE SPRING OF 1985, I was sitting in a courtyard in 
Kaladhungi, Jim Corbett's village tucked against the first of the 
Himalayan foothills to rise from plains: around me was strewn 
the paraphernalia of the movie world. I was there for the 
filming of a drama documentary I had researched and written 
on the life of Jim Corbett, the culmination of years of keen 
ambition and a love and admiration for a man I never knew but 
who had, through his writings, fundamentally shaped my 
personal philosophy and attitude towards the natural world. 

It was a fearfully hot day, even though early in the summer, and 
the film crew were hard at work arranging another set, in a 
local person's house, for the scene of Kunwar Singh's illness 
and Jim's saving of him from his opium addiction. Those not 
engaged in this work were squatting in the short shadows of 
late morning. I was with Frederick Treves, the actor playing 
Jim Corbett— and who looks remarkably like him, more so in 
costume and make-up— resting under the scant shade of some 
paw-paw trees, when one of the local staff on the film crew 
came up to us. 

'Sir,' he announced to me, 'there is an old fellow come who 
wants to meet Carpet Sahib.' He pronounced Corbett as 
'Carpet' as was the way in the Kumaon district. 

I supposed the old fellow wanted to meet the actor— others 
had done so before him, drawn by the magnetism of the 
'glamourous' movies— and so asked Freddie Treves if this 
would be in order. He, with the good grace of the generous 
man he is, agreed, although I know actors shun such public 
contact. 

An incredibly old man appeared. He must have been in his 
eighties, wizen and bent almost double by age. He walked with 
a stick newly cut from a tree and weeping sticky sap. As soon 
as he saw Freddie, he bowed low and sought to press his 
forehead to the actor's feet. 



I said to the crew member, foolishly assuming the old man to be 
perhaps a little senile, 'I think you'd better tell him this is only 
an actor. 1 

This information was translated and a gabble of Kumaoni 
dialect made in reply 

'I have told the old fellow,' the crewman reported, 'that this is 
an actor from England, but he refuses to believe this. It is, he 
says, a legend that Carpet Sahib will return one day and he 
believes this is the true Sahib come back.' Then, with obvious 
reverential astonishment, for the crewman was a city dweller 
from New Delhi, he added, 'This old fellow has walked one 
hundred kilometres to see Carpet Sahib. In just two days...' 

Anyone who has seen the Kumaon foothills will know that 
twenty kilometres would be a feat for an average fit man yet 
this old sage had walked virtually non-stop for forty-eight hours 
on hearing over the jungle grapevine that Corbett was returned 
to his home. It was Carpet Sahib's magnetism, still vibrant over 
the forty years since his departure from India, which had 
drawn the old man and not the spurious trappings of movies 
and modernity. This is the reverence with which the Kumaoni 
people viewed Corbett, and still do. It is the veneration 
afforded to a sadhu, a saintly man who has earned his 
reputation by example: in Corbett's case, by the example he set 
in the jungles of northern India. 

Corbett's famous stories of man-eating tigers and leopard 
hunting make such exciting reading one tends to overlook in 
them, in the heat of the chase retold with such simplicity of 
style and immediacy of effect, the minutiae of detail 
appertaining to the hunter's skill. And, sadly, his man-eater 
books tend to overshadow his other volumes. My India and 
Jungle Lore. In these are shown, to an even greater extent, not 
only the hunter but also the man Corbett was. 

The former volume deals, as every Corbett reader knows, with 
the author's familiarity with and love of India, his home for all 



but the last eight years of his very long life. Here is revealed 
his immense knowledge of India in all her variety: although he 
never travelled to the south of the subcontinent, he knew the 
north and centre well. Yet it is in this book. Jungle lore, that 
one sees the real soul of Corbett, the core of his love affair with 
the land of his birth— the jungles of the north and the people 
(in his mind, both human and animal folk) who inhabit it. 

Jungle Lore is probably the least known of Corbett's books. It 
does not contain sustained anecdotes of hunting dangerous 
cats or in-depth stories of jungle or forest encounters. Instead, 
it deals quite simply— occasionally almost naively— with the 
close relationship between Corbett and the natural world and 
the immense value such an intimacy bears for all men. It is also 
the nearest he came to an autobiography. 

Much of Corbett's childhood, as regards his experiences in the 
jungle, is here— his early forays with catapult and bow-and- 
arrow, his first gun and first adventures: but these are not 
presented as thrilling episodes (although they are) but as 
lessons attended in the jungle's classroom. For Corbett, term- 
time at the jungle school never ended and he never graduated, 
for it is impossible ever to do so: there is always more to learn, 
more to discover and more to observe because the jungle and 
the world of nature is in permanent flux. 

The crux of Jungle Lore, however, is not restricted to learning 
and seeing. It is more to do with feeling, with sensibility and 
sensitivity— and it is here that Corbett stakes his claim to fame 
and posterity— and with presenting nature's case to a world 
fast ignoring the wonders of the animal (and plant) kingdoms. 
For, in Jungle Lore, written thirty-seven years ago, Jim Corbett 
is lamenting the divorce of modern man from his environment. 
He learns the lessons and, like all good teachers, he seeks to 
share his knowledge and the implications of it with others. 

This book has not dated with the passing years. Its import is as 
vibrant today as ever it was, the morality even more seminal. 
Sadly, the morals Corbett espouses are still blatantly ignored. 



Much of Corbett's jungle has gone: the Siwalik Hills which he 
roamed are mostly denuded of trees, ravaged by erosion and 
mostly devoid of tigers and game. He would not recognize his 
Kumaon homeland now. 

Yet pockets do remain. The reader can still wander a little way 
down the wooded firetrack to Powalgarh, still sit on the Boar 
River bridge, still see the wall Corbett and the villagers built 
around their fields to keep the wild pigs out of the crops— 
though the absence of these creatures has long since rendered 
that defence redundant. 

Jungle Lore has a poignant and very pertinent message. It begs 
us to stop the disaster of raping the earth mother, entreats us 
to re-assert and re-affirm our contacts with the natural world, 
to get to know, understand and use to a mutual advantage the 
ways— the lore— of the wild. 

Martin Booth 



Chapter One 

FOURTEEN OF US— BOYS AND girls ranging in age from 
eight to eighteen— were sitting on the wing wall of the old 
wooden cantilever bridge over the Boar river at Kaladhungi, 
listening to Dansay telling ghost stories. The bonfire we had 
made in the middle of the road, from brushwood collected in 
the nearby jungle, had burnt down to a red glow and with 
darkness closing down Dansay had selected just the right time 
and setting for his stories, as was evident from the urgent 
admonition of one of the nervous girls to her companion: 

'Oh don't keep looking behind. You do make me feel so 
nervous. 1 

Dansay was an Irishman steeped to the crown of his head in 
every form of superstition, in which he had utter and complete 
belief, and it was therefore natural for him to tell his ghost 
stories in a very convincing manner. The stories he was telling 
that night related to shrouded figures and rattling bones, the 
mysterious opening and closing of doors, and the creaking of 
boards on stairways in old ancestral halls. As there was no 
possibility of my ever seeing a haunted ancestral hall, Dansay's 
ghost stories held no terrors for me. He had just finished telling 
his most blood-curdling story and the nervous girl had again 
admonished her companion not to look behind, when the old 
horned fish owl who spent all his days dozing on the dead 
branch of a tree roofed over with creepers— where he was safe 
from the attention of crows and other birds that love to bait 
owls— started on his nightly quest for fish and frogs in the 
Boar river by giving vent to his deep-throated call of Ho Hat 
Ho from the topmost branch of the haldu tree that had been 
blasted by lightning and that was a landmark to those of us 
who, armed with catapult or butterfly net, ventured into the 
dense jungle in which it stood. The call of the owl, often 
mistaken by the ignorant for the call of a tiger, was answered 
by his mate who, except in the mating season, lived in 
a pipal tree on the bank of the canal, and was an excuse for 
Dansay to end his ghost stories and switch over to stories about 



banshees, which to him were even more real and more to be 
feared than ghosts. According to Dansay a banshee was an evil 
female spirit that resided in dense forests and was so 
malignant that the mere hearing of it brought calamity to the 
hearer and his family and the seeing of it death to the 
unfortunate beholder. Dansay described the call of a banshee 
as a long drawn-out scream, which was heard most frequently 
on dark and stormy nights. These banshee stories had a fearful 
fascination for me, for they had their setting in the jungles in 
which I loved to roam in search of birds and their eggs and 
butterflies. 

I do not know what form the banshees took that Dansay heard 
in Ireland, but I know what form two of them took that he 
heard in the jungles at Kaladhungi. About one of these 
banshees I will tell you later, the other is known to all the 
people who live along the foothills of the Himalayas, and in 
many other parts of India, as a churail. The churail, the most 
feared of all evil spirits, appears in the form of a woman. 
Having cast her eyes on a human being this woman, whose feel 
are turned the wrong way, mesmerizes her victims, as a snake 
does a bird, and walking backwards lures them to their doom. 
When danger of seeing the woman threatens, the only defence 
against her wiles is to shield the eyes with the hands, any piece 
of cloth that is handy, or, if indoors, to pull a blanket over the 
head. 

Whatever the human race may have been in the days of the 
cave man, we of the present day are essentially children of the 
daylight. In daylight we are in our element and the most timid 
among us can, if the necessity arises, summon the courage 
needed to face any situation, and we can even laugh and make 
light of die things that a few hours previously made our skin 
creep. When daylight fades and night engulfs us the sense of 
sight we depended on no longer sustains us and we are at the 
mercy of our imagination. Imagination at the best of times can 
play strange tricks, and when to imagination is added a firm 
belief in the supernatural it is not surprising that people 



surrounded by dense forests, whose only means of transport is 
their own feet, and whose field of vision at night is limited to 
the illumination provided by a pine torch, or a hand lantern 
when paraffin is available, should dread the hours of darkness. 

Living among the people and for months on end speaking only 
their language, it was natural for Dansay to have superimposed 
their superstitions on his own. Our hillmen do not lack courage, 
and Dansay was as brave as man could be; but because of their 
belief in the supernatural, I am convinced that neither the 
hillmen nor Dansay ever dreamed of investigating what the 
former called a churail and the latter believed was a banshee. 

During all the years I have lived in Kumaon, and the many 
hundreds of nights I have spent in the jungles, I have heard 
the churail only three times— always at night— and I have seen 
it only once. 

It was the month of March. A bumper mustard crop had just 
been harvested, and the village in the midst of which our 
cottage is situated was alive with happy sounds. Men and 
women were singing and children were calling to each other. 
The moon was a night or two from the full, and visibility was 
nearly as good as in daylight. Maggie and I were on the point of 
calling for dinner— the time was close on 8 p.m.— when clear 
and piercing on the night air came the call of the churai], and 
instantly every sound in the village was hushed. In the right- 
hand corner of the compound, and some fifty yards from our 
cottage, stands an old haldu tree. Generations of vultures, 
eagles, hawks, kites, crows, and glossy ibis, have worn the bark 
off and killed upper branches of the old tree. Opening our front 
door, which had been closed against the cold wind blowing 
down from the north, Maggie and I stepped out on to the 
veranda, and as we did so, the churail called again. The call 
came from the haldu tree and there, sitting on the topmost 
branch in brilliant moonlight was the maker of the call, 
the churail. 


It is possible to describe some sounds by a combination of 



letters or of words, as for instance the 'cooee' of a human 
being, or the 'tap, tap, tapping 1 of a woodpecker, but no words 
of mine can describe the call of thechurail. If I said it 
resembled the cry of a soul in torment, or of a human being in 
agony, it would convey no meaning to you, for neither you nor I 
have heard either of these sounds. Nor can I liken the call to 
any other sounds heard in the jungles, for it is something apart, 
something that does not appear to have any connexion with our 
world and that has the effect of curdling the hearer's blood and 
arresting his heart-beats. On the previous occasions on which I 
had heard the call I knew it emanated from a bird and I 
suspected the bird to be an owl, possibly a migrant, for I know 
every bird in Kumaon and its call, and this was no bird of our 
jungles. Stepping back into the room I returned with a pair of 
field-glasses which had been used during the Kaiser's war for 
spotting for artillery and which were therefore as good as 
glasses could be. With these I examined the bird very carefully. 

I will describe what I saw in the hope that someone, more 
knowledgeable than myself, will be able to identify it. 

(a) In size the bird was a little smaller than a golden eagle. 

(b) It stood upright on its rather long legs. 

(c) Its tail was short, but not as short as an owl's tail. 

(d) Its head was not round and big like the head of an owl, nor 
did it have a short neck. 

(e) On its head there was no crest or 'horns'. 

(f) When it called— which it did at regular intervals of about 
half a minute— it put its head up facing the heavens, and 
opened its beak wide. 

(g) In colour it was an overall black, or possibly a dark brown 
which looked black by moonlight. 

I had a 28-bore shot gun, and a light rifle in the gun rack. The 
gun was useless, for the bird was out of range of it, and I was 
frightened to use the rifle. Accuracy of aim cannot be depended 



on in moonlight, and if I missed the bird everyone within 
hearing distance would be more convinced than ever that the 
call was being made by an evil spirit which even a rifle bullet 
was of no avail. After calling about twenty times the bird 
spread its wings, and gliding off the tree, vanished into the 
night. 

The village sounds were not resumed, and next day no 
references was made to the churail. 'When in the jungles,' 
warned my poacher friend Kunwar Singh when I was a small 
boy, 'never speak of a tiger by its name, for if you do, the tiger 
is sure to appear.' For the same reason the people of our 
foothills never talk of the churail. 

The younger members of the two large families who spent the 
winter months in Kaladhungi numbered fourteen, excluding my 
younger brother who was too small to take part in the nightly 
bonfire or to bathe in the river, and who therefore did not 
count. Of these fourteen, seven were girls, ranging in age from 
nine to eighteen, and seven were boys, ranging in age from 
eight to eighteen, of whom I was the youngest. This handicap, 
of being the youngest of the males, saddled me with tasks that 
I disliked intensely, for we were living in the Victorian age and 
when, for instance, the girls went bathing in the canal that 
formed one boundary of our estate, which they did every day 
except Sunday— why girls should not bathe on Sunday I do not 
know— it was deemed necessary for them to be accompanied 
by a male whose age would offer no offence to Mother Grundy. 
The selected victim being myself, it was my duty to carry the 
towels and nightdresses of the girls— for there were no swim¬ 
suits in those days— and to keep guard while the girls were 
bathing and warn them of the approach of males, for there was 
a footpath on the opposite bank of the canal which was 
occasionally used by men on their way to collect firewood in 
the jungles, or to work on the canal when it needed repair or 
cleaning. The canal was a masonry one, ten feet wide and three 
feet deep, and where there was an inlet for irrigating our 
garden the King of Kumaon, General Sir Henry Ramsay, had 



had the bed of the canal scooped out for a few yards to a depth 
of six feet, and every day before I set out with the girls I was 
cautioned not to allow any of them to get drowned in this deep 
part. The entering of running water while wearing a thin cotton 
nightdress is a difficult feat, if the proprieties are to be 
maintained, for if the unwary step into three feet of water and 
sit down— as all girls appear to want to do the moment they 
get into the water— the nightdress rises up and flows over the 
head, to the consternation of all beholders. When this 
happened, as it very frequently did, I was under strict orders to 
look the other way. 

While I was guarding the girls, and looking the other way when 
the necessity arose, the other boys armed with catapults and 
fishing-rods were making their way up the canal bank to the 
deep pool at the head of the canal, competing as they went as 
to who could shoot down the highest flower off the samal trees 
they passed, or put the first pellet into the ficus tree on the 
canal bank, a hit only being allowed when the milk-like sap— 
the best medium for the making of birdlime— trickled down the 
bole of the tree. And there were birds to be fired at, hair- 
crested drongos, golden orioles, and rosy pastors that drink the 
nectar of the samal flowers; common, slaty, and rose-headed 
paroquets that nipped off the samal flowers and, after nibbling 
a small portion, dropped the flowers to the ground for deer and 
pigs to eat; crested pied kingfishers who when disturbed went 
skimming up the canal, and always the horned owl— the mate 
of the one who lived on the far side of the Boar bridge— whose 
perch was on a branch of the pipal tree overhanging the canal, 
and who had never been known to let anyone get within 
catapult range but who nevertheless was always fired at. 
Arrived at the big pool there would be fierce competition to see 
who could land the most fish on improvised tackle of thread 
borrowed from their respective mother's or sister's work 
baskets, bent pins for those who could not afford the regulation 
hook, and rods made from the side-shoots of bamboos. The 
fishing ended when the supply of paste, used as bait, was 



exhausted or had been dropped by a careless hand into the 
water, and with a catch of a few small mahseer— for our rivers 
were full of fish— clothes were hastily discarded and all lined 
up on the big rock overhanging the pool and, at a signal, dived 
off to see who could reach the far bank first. And while the 
others were indulging in these fascinating sports I, a mile 
lower down the canal, was being told to look the other way or 
being reprimanded for not having given warning of the 
approach of the old villager who had passed carrying a load of 
wood on his head. One advantage I derived from my enforced 
labour, it let me into all the secret plans the girls made for the 
playing of practical jokes on the boy members of the two 
families in general, and on Dansay and Neil Fleming in 
particular. 

Dansay and Neil were both mad Irishmen, and here their 
similarity ended, for while Dansay was short, hairy, and as 
strong as a grizzly bear, Neil was tall and willowy and as fair as 
a lily. The difference even went deeper, for whereas Dansay 
would think nothing of shouldering his muzzle-loading rifle and 
stalking and shooting tigers on foot, Neil had a horror of the 
jungles and had never been known to fire a gun. One thing they 
had in common, hatred of each other, for both were madly in 
love with all the girls. Dansay— who had been disinherited by 
his father, a General, for refusing to go into the Army— had 
been at a Public School with my elder brothers and was at that 
time resting between the job he had lost in the Forest Service 
and the one he hoped some day to get in the Political Service. 
Neil on the other hand was a working man, assistant to my 
brother Tom in the Postal Service; and the fact that neither was 
in a position to dream of matrimony in no way damped their 
affection for the girls or lessened their jealousy of each other. 

From conversations overheard on the canal bank I learned that 
friend Neil on his last visit to Kaladhungi had been too full of 
himself and was beginning to imagine things, whereas Dansay 
on the other hand was too subdued and very slow in coming 
forward. To rectify this unsatisfactory state of affairs it was 



thought necessary to pull Neil down a whole row of pegs, and 
elevate Dansay a little: 'Not too much, my dear, or he will then 
begin to imagine things. 1 What 'imagining things' meant I did 
not know, and I thought it best not to ask. To accomplish these 
desired ends, with one stroke if possible, it would be necessary 
to include both the too ardent Neil, and the too slow Dan in the 
same practical joke. Many plans were discussed and the one 
eventually agreed on needed the co-operation of brother Tom. 
Work during the winter months was not heavy in Naini Tal and 
Tom was in the habit of allowing Neil to absent himself every 
alternate week from Saturday evening to Monday morning. 

This brief holiday Neil spent with one or other of the two 
families in Kaladhungi, in both of which he was welcome for his 
genial nature and his grand voice. Accordingly a letter was sent 
to Tom asking him to detain Neil on one pretext or another on 
the coming Saturday evening, and to send him off on his 
fifteen-mile walk to Kaladhungi so as to arrive at the end of his 
journey as night was falling. Further, Tom was to hint to Neil 
that the girls would probably get alarmed at his late arrival and 
would walk up the road to meet him. The plan that had been 
agreed on for this, the greatest of all practical jokes, was that 
Dansay, sewn up in one of his bear skins, was to be conducted 
by the girls two miles up the Naini Tal road to where there was 
a sharp bend on the road. At this point Dansay was to take up 
position behind a rock and, when Neil arrived, roar at him in a 
bear-like manner. Neil, on seeing the bear, was expected to 
dash down the road into the arms of the waiting girls who, on 
hearing his story, would pass uncomplimentary remarks on his 
bravery, and scream with laughter in which Dansay would join 
when he arrived on the scene a minute later. Dansay raised 
objections, which he withdrew when he was told that the strip 
of red flannel he had found in his ham sandwich, and which had 
caused him a lot of embarrassment at a picnic two weeks 
previously, had been inserted at Neil's suggestion. 

Traffic on the Kaladhungi-Naini Tal road ceased at sundown 
and on the appointed evening Dansay, sewn into one of his bear 



skins, was led by the girls, at times on all fours and at times on 
his flat feet, to the pre-arranged spot where— the evening 
being warm and the skin having been sewn over his clothes— 
he arrived in a bath of sweat. In the meantime up in Naini Tal 
Neil was chafing at being given one job after another until the 
time had passed when he usually started on his walk to 
Kaladhungi. Eventually he was told that he could go, and 
before he left, Tom produced his shot gun and putting two 
cartridges into it placed it in Neil's hands and warned him that 
it was only to be used in emergency The road from Naini Tal to 
Kaladhungi is downhill most of the way and for the first eight 
miles passes through patches of cultivation; thereafter, and 
right clown to Kaladhungi, it runs through more or less dense 
forest. Dansay and the girls had been in their respective 
positions for some time, and the light was beginning to fade, 
when down the road came Neil singing 'Killarney' at the top of 
his voice, to keep his courage up. The singing came nearer and 
nearer— the girls said later that they had never heard Neil in 
better voice— and then round the bend where Dansay was 
waiting for him came Neil. Acting on instructions, Dansay stood 
up on his hind legs and roared at Neil in a bear-like manner, 
and Neil threw up his gun and fired off both barrels. A cloud of 
smoke obscured Neil's vision and as he started to run away he 
heard the 'bear' go rolling down the hill out of sight. At that 
moment the girls came running up the road, and at the sight of 
them, Neil brandished his gun and said he had just shot a huge 
bear that had made a furious attack upon him. Asked by the 
horrified girls what had become of the bear Neil pointed down 
the hill and invited the girls to accompany him to have a look at 
his bag, adding that it would be quite safe to do so for he had 
shot the bear dead. Declining the invitation the girls told Neil 
to go down alone and nothing loth Neil— who was greatly 
touched by the tears of the girls which he thought were being 
shed at his narrow escape from the bear— went down the hill. 
What Dansay said to Neil and what Neil said to Dansay is not 
on record; but when, after a long interval, they scrambled up to 
the road— where the girls were anxiously waiting— Dansay 



was carrying the gun, and Neil was carrying the bear's skin. 
Dansay who in his roll down the steep hillside had been saved 
from injury by the bear's skin, asserted that Neil had shot him 
in the chest and knocked him off his feet. And when Neil 
explained how he came into possession of the gun, which had 
so nearly caused a fatal accident, the blame for the miscarriage 
of the whole enterprise was heaped on brother Tom's absent 
head. 

Monday was a government holiday and when Tom arrived on 
Sunday night to spend the holiday at home, he was confronted 
by a bevy of angry girls who demanded to know what he meant 
by entrusting a man like Neil with a loaded gun and thereby 
endangering the life of Dansay. Tom listened while the storm 
broke over his head, and when the narrator got to the part 
where Dansay had been shot in the chest and knocked off his 
feet and the girls had wept in each other's arms at his untimely 
death, Tom scandalized all present by bursting into peals of 
laughter, in which all but Dansay joined when he explained that 
suspecting— from the letter he had received— that mischief 
was on foot he had extracted the bullets from the cartridges, 
and loaded them with flour. So the net result of the great 
practical joke was not what had been expected, for Neil got 
more full of himself, while Dansay got more subdued. 



Chapter Two 

OWING TO MY ASSOCIATION WITH the girls Dansay 
suspected me, quite wrongly of having had a hand in the bear 
incident out of which he had not come with as much credit to 
himself as had been expected, for the only contribution I had 
made was to suggest that strong twine be used to sew him into 
the bear's skin instead of thread. To no other reason can I 
ascribe his invitation to me one morning— while I was showing 
my companions how to swing from one branch of a tree to 
another— to accompany him on a shoot. Uplifted to the seventh 
heaven at having been selected for this great honour I set out 
with Dansay who— after we had started— said he would show 
me how to shoot a tiger on foot. At the Dhunigar canebrakes— 
the home of tigers as I found in subsequent years— we saw 
many pug marks but no tigers, and on the way home Dansay, 
who was a friend of the family, decided to give me my first 
lesson in firing a gun. At the time he came to this decision we 
were standing at one end of an open glade, at the other end of 
which a number of white-capped laughing thrushes were 
turning up the dead leaves in search of white ants. While we 
had been after the tigers Dansay had carried his muzzle¬ 
loading rifle in his hands and his shotgun— also a muzzle- 
loader— slung over his shoulder. He now unslung the shotgun 
and placing it in my hands pointed to the thrushes and 
instructed me to put my left foot a little in advance of the right, 
raise the gun to my shoulder, hold it steady, and gently press 
the trigger, all of which I did. Even after this long lapse of years 
I am not sure in my mind whether the gun had been specially 
loaded for my benefit or whether Dansay who, as I have told 
you, was as strong as a grizzly bear, was in the habit of over¬ 
charging his gun. Anyway, when I recovered sufficiently to pick 
myself up and take an interest in my surroundings I saw 
Dansay running his hands along the barrels of the gun to see if 
they had got dented on the stones on to which I flung the gun 
as I went heels over head on pressing the trigger. The thrushes 
had all gone but on the ground on which they had been feeding 



we found a white-browed flycatcher, a bird about the size of a 
robin. On examining the little bird we found no signs of injury 
and Dansay concluded it had died of shock, a conclusion with 
which I was in entire agreement, for I too had nearly died of 
shock. 

Shortly after my experience with Dansay's muzzle-loader my 
eldest brother Tom who, on the death of my father when I was 
four years of age, had taken over the responsibilities of the 
family, announced one evening that he was going to take me 
out bear shooting. The announcement was received with 
consternation by my mother who, though she had the courage 
of Joan of Arc and Nurse Cavell combined, was as gentle and as 
timid as a dove. I listened interestedly while Tom— on whom I 
lavished all of a small boy's hero worship— assured my mother 
that there was no danger, that he would take great care of me, 
and that I would come to no harm. When my mother eventually 
gave her consent to my going bear shooting I determined I 
would keep out of harm's way by sticking to brother Tom's 
heels like glue. 

We proceeded that evening— Tom carrying both his own rifle 
and a gun for me— along a game track that ran across the face 
of a great mountain. Half-way across the mountain we came to 
a deep, dark, and evil-looking ravine. Tom stopped at the edge 
of the ravine and whispered to me that it was a grand place for 
bears, who either went up or down the ravine or came along 
the game track. He then pointed to a rock on the side of the 
track for me to sit on, put the gun and two ball cartridges into 
my hands, and warned me to be very careful to kill and not 
wound any bears I fired at. Then, pointing to a solitary oak tree 
on the shoulder of the mountain eight hundred yards away, he 
said he was going there and that if during the course of the 
evening I saw a bear anywhere in his vicinity and in a position 
in which I thought he could not see it, I was to go and tell him, 
and with these parting words Tom left me. 

A wind was blowing, rustling the dry grass and dead leaves. 



and my imagination filled the jungle round me with hungry 
bears. (During that winter nine bears were shot on that 
mountain.) That I would presently be eaten I had no doubt 
whatever, and I was quite sure the meal would prove a very 
painful one for me. Time dragged on leaden feet, each moment 
adding to my terror, and when the glow from the setting sun 
was bathing the mountain side in red, I saw a bear slowly 
making its way along the skyline a few hundred yards above 
Tom's tree. Whether Tom had seen the bear or not mattered no 
jot to me. The opportunity I had been praying for to get away 
from that terrifying spot had come, and I was going while the 
going was still good. So, shouldering the gun, which after my 
experience with Dansay's muzzle-loader I had been too 
frightened to load, I set off to tell Tom about the bear and to 
reattach myself to him. 

The Himalayan black bear, in our part of the world, live 
throughout the winter on acorns. Bears are heavy and acorns 
grow at the extremities of oak branches, and in order to get at 
the acorns bears bend the branches inwards towards the 
centre of the tree. Some of these branches are only cracked 
and remain green for years, others are torn right off and fall to 
the ground when released, while others again are left dangling 
by a strand of bark. I had crossed the ravine and entered a 
dense patch of undergrowth when I heard a rushing sound. 
Petrified, I stood quite still while the sound grew louder and 
louder, and then with a crash a big object fell right in front of 
me. It was only a branch which a bear had left dangling on the 
tree under which I was passing, and which the wind had 
dislodged, but had it been the biggest bear in Asia it could not 
have frightened me more. The courage I had summoned to take 
me to brother Tom had all gone, so back to my rock I crept. If a 
human being in normal health can die of fear, I would have 
died that night and many times since. 

The red glow had faded off the mountain and the light gone out 
of the sky, when a figure loomed out of the darkness and a 
cheery voice hailed me, 'You have not been feeling frightened. 



have you? 1 Tom asked as he took my gun, and when I said I was 
not feeling frightened now, Tom left it at that, for he was a wise 
and a very understanding brother. 

Tom was a great believer in making an early start when he 
went shooting, and the morning he took me with him to shoot 
peafowl he roused me at 4 a.m., made me wash and dress as 
silently as possible in order not to disturb the rest of the family 
and, half an hour later, with a hot cup of tea and home-made 
biscuits to sustain us, we set out in the dark on our seven-mile 
walk to Garuppu. 

In my lifetime I have seen great changes in the forests of the 
Tarai and Bhabar. Some of these changes have resulted from 
exploitation, others have been brought about in a natural 
manner. In some areas where there were dense virgin forests 
there is now scrub jungle, and where there were wide open 
stretches of grass and plum bushes there is now forest. To the 
south east of Garuppu where there is now tree jungle, there 
was (at the time I am writing about), waist-high grass and plum 
bushes. It was this area that Tom was making for on that 
December morning, for the plums were ripe and were an 
irresistible attraction, not only to deer and pigs but also to 
peafowl. 

It was still dark when we arrived at Garuppu so we sat near the 
well while light gradually appeared in the east, listening to the 
jungle awakening. On all sides red jungle-cocks were crowing, 
arousing from their slumbers a multitude of smaller birds each 
of which, as it shook the dew from its feathers and the sleep 
out of its eyes, joined the cocks in heralding the new-born day. 
Presently the peafowl, who were roosting on the 
giantsamal trees, scattered over the wide grass area, added 
their piercing call to the growing volume of jungle sounds, and 
when the rising sun touched the topmost branches of 
a samal tree within our view, the twenty or more peafowl that 
were clustered on the widespreading branches flew down 
among the plum bushes. Getting to his feet Tom knocked the 



ashes out of his pipe, and said it was time for us to enter the 
jungle. The dew in this low-lying area rises to a height of about 
thirty feet, and when going through tree jungle in the early 
morning the moisture dripping from the leaves resembles both 
in sound and in volume a shower of rain. The grass, waist-high 
for Tom and chin-high for me, into which we stepped from the 
road was saturated with dew and we had only gone a few yards 
into it when my clothes were clinging to me, and adding to the 
discomfort of wet clothes the morning was bitterly cold. 

Going in the direction of the samal tree we put up ten or a 
dozen peafowl all of which, with one exception, flew low for 
some distance and resettled in the grass. The exception, a 
peacock in full plumage, rose at a steep angle and alighted on a 
branch of the samal tree. Tom now filled me with delight by 
putting his 12-bore breach-loading hammer gun into my hands, 
and telling me to go forward and shoot the peacock. I had a 
distance of a hundred and fifty yards to go and when I had 
covered forty yards I stopped, and as I was trying to cock the 
gun I heard a low whistle and on looking round saw Tom 
beckoning to me. On my rejoining him he said I was out of 
range where I had stopped, and when I told him I had not 
stopped to fire the gun, but to cock it, he said I must never 
cock a gun until I was ready to fire for it was dangerous 
anywhere to carry a cocked gun and most of all in grass where 
one was liable to trip up or stumble into unseen holes. 'Now,' 
he said, 'go forward and have another try. 1 On this second 
occasion— taking advantage of a big plum bush— I crept up to 
within easy range. The samal tree was leafless but was covered 
with big red flowers, and sitting on a branch on my side of the 
tree, with the slanting rays of the sun shining on it, was the 
most beautiful peacock I had ever seen. The time had now 
come to cock the gun but what with excitement and my frozen 
fingers I found it impossible to draw back the hammers, and 
while I was wondering what to do next the peacock flew away. 
'Never mind/ Tom said when he came up to me. 'You will have 
better luck next time.' But no more birds obliged me by flying 



into trees that morning, and after Tom had shot a red jungle- 
cock and three peafowl we left the grass and plum jungle and 
regaining the road made for home and a late breakfast. 



Chapter Three 

WITH THE THREE LESSONS I have detailed, my jungle 
training— as far as my elders were concerned— was over. I had 
been shown how to handle and to fire a gun, and I had been 
taken into jungles in which there were tigers and bears with 
the object, I believe, of showing me that no danger was to be 
apprehended from unwounded animals. Lessons well learnt 
when young are never afterwards forgotten, and I had learnt 
my lessons well. Whether or not from now onwards I took 
advantage of these lessons to interest myself in any form of 
field sport was entirely my own concern, and I am glad it was 
so. I am glad the decision was left with me and that I was not 
told I must do this or must do that not because of any desire on 
my part, but because my elders considered it was the right 
thing for a boy of my age to do. 

Boys are not lacking in intelligence, and where facilities for 
field sports exist— as they do in most parts of India— they 
should not be deprived of the pleasure of selecting the form of 
sport that most appeals to them and for which they are 
physically fitted, or of eschewing field sports altogether if they 
have no interest in them and are averse to taking life. 
Compulsion— no matter how well veiled— even though it 
follows the lines of an individual's inclinations, takes, in my 
opinion, all the joy out of any form of sport. 

Tom helped my mother and my sisters to nurse me through a 
life-and-death struggle with pneumonia, and when an incentive 
was needed to make me take an interest in the life that had so 
nearly slipped through my fingers, he gave me my first 
catapult. Sitting on my bed Tom produced the catapult from his 
pocket, and putting it into my hands, took a cup of beef juice 
off the bed-side table and told me I must drink it in order to get 
strong enough to use the catapult. Thereafter I took without 
protest all that was offered me, and as I regained strength Tom 
assisted the other members of the family to keep my interest 
alive by telling me about the jungles and instructing me in the 



use of my catapult. 

From Tom I learned that the year— for sportsmen— was 
divided into two seasons, a close season and an open season. 
During the close season my catapult would have to be put 
away for at this time birds were nesting and it was cruel to kill 
them while they were sitting on their eggs or caring for their 
young. During the open season I could use my catapult freely to 
kill birds, provided I made use of every bird I killed. Green 
pigeons and blue rockpigeons, which abounded in our hills, 
could be shot to eat, but all other birds would have to be 
skinned and set up and for this purpose, when the time came, 
Tom provided me with a skinning knife and a pot of arsenical 
soap. Tom did not include taxidermy among his many 
accomplishments, however, but his demonstration with a 
cock kalege pheasant as subject gave me a general idea of how 
to remove a bird's skin, and practice later made me perfect. A 
cousin of ours, Stephen Dease, was at that time compiling a 
book of the birds of Kumaon and most of the four hundred and 
eighty coloured illustrations in his book were made from birds 
in my collection, or from specimens I specially collected for 
him. 

Tom had two dogs: Poppy, a red pi dog which he found starving 
in the streets of Kabul during the second Afghan war and which 
he brought back to India with him; and Magog, a liver and 
white spaniel with a great plume of a tail. Poppy had no use for 
small boys, but Magog— who was strong enough to carry me 
for short distances— was more liberal minded and in addition 
to constituting himself my protector, lavished all his affection 
on me. It was Magog who taught me it was unwise to pass 
close to dense cover in which animals who were sleeping might 
resent being disturbed, and it was he who showed me that a 
dog can learn to walk as noiselessly through a jungle as a cat. 
With Magog to give me confidence I penetrated deep into the 
jungles where previously I had been afraid to go, and during 
the catapult days we met with one exciting experience which 
nearly cost Magog his life. 



We were out that morning trying to get a scarlet sun-bird for 
my collection when Dansay out for a walk with his Scottie 
called Thistle, joined us. The two dogs were not good friends, 
but they refrained from fighting and after we had proceeded a 
short distance together Thistle put up a porcupine and Magog, 
disregarding my urgent call to him, joined in the chase. Dansay 
was armed with his muzzle-loading shotgun but was afraid to 
use it for fear of hitting the dogs which were running one on 
either side of the porcupine and biting at it. Running was not 
Dansay's strong point and, further, he was hampered with his 
gun so it was not long before the porcupine, the two dogs, and 
I, had left him far behind. Porcupines are very unpleasant 
animals to deal with, for though they cannot project or 'shoot' 
their quills they are tough and very agile on their feet, and 
their method of defence, or attack, is to erect their quills and 
run backwards. 

Before joining in the chase I had stuffed my catapult into my 
pocket and armed myself with a stout stick, but I was able to do 
little to help the dogs, for every time I got near the porcupine it 
ran at me and I was several times saved by the dogs from being 
impaled on its quills. When the chase had covered half a mile 
and we were approaching a deep ravine in which there were 
porcupine burrows, Magog got the porcupine by the nose and 
Thistle got hold of its throat. Dansay arrived when the fight 
was practically over, and, for good measure, he put a charge of 
shot into the porcupine. Both dogs were streaming with blood, 
and after we had pulled from them all the quills we could we 
hurried home— Dansay carrying the porcupine slung over his 
shoulder— to try to pull out with pincers the quills that had 
broken off short and resisted all our attempts to pull them out 
with our fingers, for porcupine quills are barbed and difficult to 
extract. 

Magog passed a very restless day and night sneezing 
frequently and, each time he did so, leaving a big clot of blood 
on the straw on which he was lying. The following day was 
fortunately a Sunday and when Tom arrived from Naini Tal to 



spend the day at home, he found that a quill had broken off 
short inside Magog's nose. After many fruitless attempts Tom 
eventually got hold of the broken end with the pincers and 
extracted a six-inch length of quill, of the thickness of the quills 
that are used for the making of penholders. Blood spurted out 
after the quill had been removed, and as we had no means of 
stopping the flow Magog's life was despaired of. However, with 
careful nursing and feeding he recovered, as did also Thistle 
who had not come as badly out of the fight with the porcupine 
as Magog had done. After I had been given the muzzle-loading 
gun, about which I shall tell you later, Magog and I met with 
two exciting experiences, one at Kaladhungi and the other at 
Naini Tal. Naya Gaon village, which I have mentioned 
elsewhere, was at that time fully cultivated and between the 
cultivation and the Dhunigar stream there was a strip of jungle, 
intercepted with open glades. Through this strip of jungle 
which was from a quarter to half a mile wide runs a game track 
parallel to, and midway between, the cultivation and the 
stream. The jungles on both sides of the stream were teeming 
with game in the way of red jungle-fowl, peafowl, deer, and pig, 
that took heavy toll of the crops and that crossed the game 
track on their way to or from the fields. It was on this game 
track that Magog and I met with our first experience. 

Naya Gaon is three miles from our home at Kaladhungi and at 
crack of dawn one morning Magog and I set out to try to bag a 
peafowl. Keeping to the middle of the wide road, for the light 
was not good and the jungle through which the road ran was 
the haunt of leopards and tigers, we arrived at the point where 
the game track met the road just as the sun was rising. Here I 
proceeded to load the gun, a long business, for first the powder 
had to be measured and poured down the barrel and a thick 
felt wad firmly rammed down on it. The shot then had to be 
measured and poured down on to the felt wad and a thin 
cardboard wad rammed down on the shot. When the ramrod 
bounced off the charge in the barrel, the gun was considered to 
be well and truly loaded. The big cumbersome hammer was 



then put at half-cock and a percussion cap firmly fixed on the 
nipple. When these several items had been performed to my 
satisfaction I stowed away the loading materials in my 
haversack, and Magog and I set off on the game track. A 
number of jungle-fowl and several peafowl crossed the track in 
front of us but none of them stood to give me a shot, and we 
had proceeded for about half a mile when we came to an open 
glade and as we stepped out on it seven peafowl, in single file, 
crossed its further end. Waiting for a few moments we crept 
forward to where the peafowl had crossed, and I then sent in 
Magog to put them up. 

Peafowl when put up by a dog in thick jungle invariably settle 
on the branches of trees, and as I was at the stage when even a 
sitting bird was difficult to shoot, it took Magog's and my 
combined efforts to bring a peafowl to bag. Magog loved 
peafowl above all other game, and after treeing the birds he 
invariably dashed round barking at them, and while he 
engaged their attention I crept up to do my part. 

The seven peafowl after crossing the glade had evidently taken 
to their legs, for Magog had gone at least a hundred yards into 
the dense scrub and tree jungle before I heard a flutter of 
wings and the squark of the peafowl, followed immediately 
afterwards by a frightened yelp from Magog and the angry roar 
of a tiger. The peafowl had quite evidently led Magog on to a 
sleeping tiger, and birds, dog, and tiger, were each expressing 
their surprise, fear, and resentment, in their own particular 
way. Magog after his first yelp of fear was barking furiously 
and running, and the tiger was emitting roar upon roar and 
chasing him, and both were coming towards me. In the general 
confusion a peacock— giving its alarm call— came sailing 
through the trees and alighted on a branch just above my head, 
but for the time being I had lost all interest in birds and my one 
and only desire was to go somewhere, far away, where there 
were no tigers. Magog had four legs to carry him over the 
ground whereas I only had two, so without any feeling of 
shame— for deserting a faithful companion— I picked up my 



feet and ran as I had never run before. Magog soon overtook 
me and the roaring behind us ceased. 

I can picture the tiger now, though I could not do so at the 
time, sitting down on his haunches on reaching the open glade 
and laughing, a tiger's laugh, at the sight of a big dog and a 
small boy running for what they thought was dear life, while all 
that he was doing was to shoo away a dog that had disturbed 
his slumbers. 

I met with one more experience that winter before we left 
Kaladhungi for our summer home in Naini Tal and on that 
occasion I was alone, for Magog had taken french leave to visit 
a lady friend in the village and was absent when I started. I had 
been avoiding dense jungle for some time and keeping to more 
open stretches, and on this particular morning I was looking 
for jungle-fowl near the Garuppu road below Naya Gaon. Many 
birds were scratching about on the road but none of them let 
me get close enough for a shot, so I left the road and entered 
the jungle which here consisted of trees, a few scattered 
bushes, and short grass. Before leaving the road I removed my 
shoes and stockings, and I had only proceeded a short distance 
when I caught sight of a red jungle-cock scratching up the 
dead leaves under a tree. 

When a jungle-fowl, or a farmyard chicken, scratches up in the 
one case dead leaves and in the other litter, it holds its head 
high when looking round for danger and if there is no danger 
near it lowers its head to feed on the exposed insects or corn. 
The cock that was feeding under the tree was out of range so I 
started on my bare feet to stalk it. Gaining a yard or two each 
time the cock lowered his head and freezing each time he 
raised it, I had nearly got within shooting range when I came 
on a shallow depression. One step into the depression— which 
was masked on both sides with knee-high grass— and two 
steps on the far side and I would be in range, and would in 
addition have a small tree against which to rest the heavy gun 
and take careful aim. So waiting until the cock again lowered 



his head I stepped into the depression, and put my bare foot on 
the coils of a big python. A few days previously I had run as no 
boy had ever run, and I now jumped as no boy had ever 
jumped, and as I landed on the far side of the depression I 
whipped round and fired into the writhing mass and ran until I 
regained the safety of the road. 

In all the years I have spent in the jungles of Northern India I 
have never heard of a python killing a human being; even so, I 
know I had a very lucky escape that morning, for if the python 
had caught me by the leg, as it would undoubtedly have done if 
it had not been asleep, there would have been no necessity for 
it to kill me, for I should have died of fright, as a full- 
grown cheetal hind died near my tent one night when a python 
caught it by the tail. How big the python was that I stepped on, 
and whether I killed it or not, I do not know for I never went 
back to look. In that same area I have seen python eighteen 
feet in length, and I have seen one that had swallowed 
a cheetal and another that had swallowed a kakar. 

Magog and I met with our second experience shortly after we 
returned to Naini Tal from Kaladhungi. The forests round Naini 
Tal at that time teemed with kalege pheasants and game of all 
kinds, and as there were few sportsmen and no restrictions 
with regard to shooting areas it was possible for Magog and me 
to go out in the evening after school hours and bag a brace of 
pheasants or hill-partridge for the larder. 

One evening Magog and I walked down the Kaladhungi road 
and though Magog put up several pheasants, none of them 
remained seated on a tree long enough to give me a shot. At 
Sarya Tal, the little lake nestling at the foot of the valley, we 
left the road and entered the jungle with the object of working 
back to the gorge at the upper end of the valley. Near the lake I 
shot a pheasant, and going through dense brushwood and over 
great piles of rocks we had got back to within two hundred 
yards of the road when, on emerging from some thick cover on 
to an open grassy glade, we saw several pheasants jumping up 



from a bed of wild balsam to eat the berries off a low bush. The 
birds were only visible while they were in the air, and as I had 
not reached the stage when I could hit a moving target I sat 
down on the ground, with Magog lying alongside, to wait for 
one of the birds to come out on to the glade. 

We had been in position for some time and the birds were still 
jumping up to reach the berries when on the road— which ran 
diagonally across the face of the hill— we heard a number of 
men talking and laughing. From the rattling of their tin cans I 
knew they were milkmen who had been up to Naini Tal to sell 
milk and were now on their way home to their villages below 
Sarya Tal. I first heard the men when they turned a corner in 
road four hundred yards away, and they had reached a point 
above and a little to our left front when they all shouted 
together as though they were driving some animal off the road. 
Next minute, in the jungle immediately above us, we heard 
some big animal coming in our direction. The undergrowth was 
too dense for me to see what the animal was until it dashed 
into the bed of balsam and put up the pheasants, which went 
skimming over our heads: then out on to the open glade 
bounded a big leopard. The leopard saw us while he was still in 
the air, and as he touched the ground he lay flat and froze in 
that position. The glade sloped upwards at an angle of thirty 
degrees, and as the leopard was above and some ten yards 
from us every inch of him from his chin to the tip of his tail was 
visible. As the leopard appeared I released my left hand from 
the gun and placed it on Magog's neck and I could now feel 
tremors running through him, as I could feel them running 
through myself. 

This was the first leopard that Magog and I had ever seen, and 
as the wind was blowing up the hill I believe our reactions to it 
were much the same— intense excitement, but no feeling of 
fear. This absence of fear I can now, after a lifetime's 
experience, attribute to the fact that the leopard had no evil 
intentions towards us. Driven off the road by the men, he was 
quite possibly making for the mass of rocks over which Magog 



and I had recently come, and on clearing the bushes and 
finding a boy and a dog directly in his line of retreat he had 
frozen, to take stock of the situation. A glance at us was 
sufficient to satisfy him that we had no hostile intensions 
towards him, for a leopard can size up a situation more quickly 
than any other animal in our jungles. And now, satisfied from 
our whole attitude that he had nothing to fear from us, and 
satisfied also that there were no other human beings in the 
direction that he wanted to go, he leapt from his crouching 
position and in a few graceful bounds disappeared into the 
jungle behind us. The wind blowing from this direction carried 
the scent of the leopard to Magog and in a second he was on 
his feet growling fiercely and with all the hair on his neck and 
back on end. Only now he realized that the beautiful animal he 
had watched without any feeling of fear and that could have 
killed him, big as he was, without any difficulty, had been a 
leopard, his most deadly and most feared enemy in all the 
jungles. 



Chapter Four 

BETWEEN THE CATAPULT AND THE muzzle-loader periods 
there was a bow-and-arrow interlude which I look back on with 
very great pleasure, for though I never succeeded in impaling 
bird or beast with an arrow I opened my credit account— with 
my small savings— with the bank of Nature during that period, 
and the Jungle Lore I absorbed during the interlude, and later, 
has been a never-ending source of pleasure to me. 

I have used the word 'absorbed', in preference to 'learnt', for 
jungle lore is not a science that can be learnt from textbooks; it 
can, however, be absorbed, a little at a time, and the absorption 
process can go on indefinitely, for the book of nature has no 
beginning, as it has no end. Open the book where you will, and 
at any period of your life, and if you have the desire to acquire 
knowledge you will find it of intense interest, and no matter 
how long or how intently you study the pages your interest will 
not flag, for in nature there is no finality. 

Today it is spring, and the tree before you is bedecked with gay 
bloom. Attracted by this bloom a multitude of birds of many 
colours are flitting from branch to branch, some drinking the 
nectar from the flowers, others eating the petals, and others 
again feeding on the bees that are busily collecting honey. 
Tomorrow the bloom will have given place to fruit and a 
different multitude of birds will be in possession of the tree. 

And each member of the different multitudes has its allotted 
place in the scheme of nature. One to beautify nature's garden, 
another to fill it with melody, and yet another to regenerate the 
garden. 

Season after season, year after year, the scene changes. A new 
generation of birds in varying numbers and species adorn the 
tree. The tree loses a limb— torn off in a storm— gets 
stackheaded and dies, and another tree takes its place; and so 
the cycle goes on. 

On the path at your feet is the track of a snake that passed that 



way an hour before sunrise. The snake was going from the 
right-hand side of the path to the left, was three inches in girth, 
and you can be reasonably certain that it was of a poisonous 
variety Tomorrow the track on the same path, or on another, 
may show that the snake that crossed it five minutes earlier 
was travelling from left to right, that it was five inches in girth, 
and that it was non-poisonous. 

And so the knowledge you absorb today will be added to the 
knowledge you will absorb tomorrow, and on your capacity for 
absorption, not on any fixed standard, will depend the amount 
of knowledge yon ultimately accumulate. And at the end of the 
accumulating period— be that period one year or fifty— you 
will find that you are only at the beginning, and that the whole 
field of nature lies before you waiting to be explored and to be 
absorbed. But be assured that if you are not interested or if you 
have no desire to acquire knowledge, you will learn nothing 
from nature. 

I walked with a companion for twelve miles through a beautiful 
forest from one camp to another. It was the month of April and 
nature was at her best. Trees, shrubs, and creepers were in full 
bloom. Gaily coloured butterflies flitted from flower to flower, 
and the air, filled with the scent of the flowers, throbbed with 
the song of birds. At the end of the day my companion was 
asked if he had enjoyed the walk, and he answered, 'No. The 
road was very rough. 1 

I was travelling, shortly after World War I, from Bombay to 
Mombasa in the British India liner Karagola. There were five of 
us on the upper deck. I was going to Tanganyika to build a 
house, the other four were going to Kenya— three to shoot and 
one to look at a farm he had purchased. The sea was rough and 
I am a bad sailor, so I spent most of my time dozing in a corner 
of the smoke room. The others sat at a table nearby playing 
bridge, smoking, and talking, mostly about sport. One day, on 
being awakened by a cramp in my leg, I heard the youngest 
member of the party say, 'Oh, I know all about tigers. I spent a 



fortnight with a Forest Officer in the Central Provinces last 
year.' 

Admittedly two extreme cases, but they will serve to emphasize 
my contention that if you are not interested you will see 
nothing but the road you walk on, and if you have no desire to 
acquire knowledge and assume you can learn in a fortnight 
what cannot be learnt in a lifetime, you will remain ignorant to 
the end. 



Chapter Five 

DURING MY CHILDHOOD DAYS, AND the ten years I spent at 
school, and again while I was working in Bengal, and later 
between the two world wars, I spent all my holidays and leave 
in the jungles in and around Kaladhungi. If during those years I 
did not absorb as much jungle lore as I might have done, the 
fault is mine, for I had ample opportunities of doing so. 
Opportunities which will never be enjoyed by another, for 
pressure of population has brought under cultivation large 
areas on which in my time game wandered at will; while 
standardization of forests, with all the evils it brings in its train 
of wild life, has resulted in the total destruction of the trees 
that bore the flowers and the fruit that birds and animals live 
on. One result of this destruction, which in my opinion was 
quite unnecessary, has been to drive millions of monkeys out of 
the forests on to cultivated land, presenting Government with a 
problem which they are finding it difficult to deal with owing to 
the religious prejudices of the population, who look upon 
monkeys as sacred animals. A day will come when this problem 
will have to be faced, and the lot of those who have to face it 
will not be an enviable one, for in the United Provinces alone 
the monkey population— in my opinion— is less than ten 
million, and ten million monkeys living on crops and garden 
fruit present a very major problem. 

Had I realized in those far-off days that a time would conic 
when I would write this book, I would have tried to learn more 
than I did, for the time I spent in the jungles held unalloyed 
happiness for me, and that happiness I would now gladly share. 
My happiness, I believe, resulted from the fact that all wild life 
is happy in its natural surroundings. In nature there is no 
sorrow, and no repining. A bird from a flock, or an animal from 
a herd, is taken by hawk or by carnivorous beast and those that 
are left rejoice that their time had not come today, and have no 
thought of tomorrow. When I was ignorant I tried to rescue 
birds and young animals caught by hawks or by eagles, and 
deer caught by carnivorous beasts, but soon found that in 



trying to rescue one I caused the death of two. For the talons of 
hawk and eagle, and the teeth and claws of carnivorous beasts, 
hold poison in the form of decayed flesh or blood, and unless 
expert treatment is immediately applied— which is not possible 
in a jungle— only one in a hundred of rescued birds or animals 
survive, and the killer, being deprived of its prey, immediately 
finds another victim to satisfy its hunger or the hunger of its 
young. 

It is the function of certain birds and animals to maintain the 
balance in nature, and in order to carry out this function and at 
the same time provide themselves with the only food they can 
assimilate it is necessary for them to kill. This killing is— 
whenever possible— expeditiously and very expertly 
performed. From the killer's point of view expeditious killing is 
necessary to avoid attracting enemies, and I see no reason why 
it should not also be a provision of nature designed to minimize 
suffering. 

Each species has its own method of killing and the method 
employed in individual cases depends to a great extent on the 
relative size of the killer and its victim. For instance, a 
peregrine falcon that does most of its killing on the ground will, 
on occasion, take a small bird on the wing and kill and eat it in 
the air. Again, a tiger that on occasion finds it necessary to 
hamstring an animal before overpowering and killing it will on 
another occasion strike down a victim with a single blow. 

The jungle folk, in their natural surroundings, do not kill 
wantonly. Killing for sport is, however, occasionally indulged in, 
and some animals, notably pine-marten, civet cats, and 
mongoose, will, in abnormal circumstances, kill in excess of 
their needs. Sport has a wide meaning and can be interpreted 
in many ways. In the two instances I am going to narrate it 
should be interpreted liberally. 

When Percy Wyndham was Commissioner of Kumaon he was 
asked by Sir Harcourt Butler, Governor of the then United 
Provinces, to provide a python for the recently-opened 



Lucknow Zoo. Wyndham was on his winter tour when he 
received the request and on arrival at Kaladhungi he asked me 
if I knew of a python that would be a credit to our jungles and a 
suitable gift for a commissioner to present to a Governor. It so 
happened that I did know of such a python, and next day 
Wyndham and two of his shikaris and I set out on an elephant 
to look at the python I had in mind. I had known this python for 
several years and I had no difficulty in guiding the elephant to 
it. 

We found the python lying full stretch on the bed of a shallow 
stream with an inch or two of gin-clear water flowing over it, 
and it looked for all the world like a museum specimen in a 
glass case. When Wyndham saw it he said it was just the kind 
of python he had hoped to secure, and he ordered the mahout 
to undo a length of rope from the trappings of the elephant. 
When this had been done, Wyndham made a noose at one end 
of the rope and handing it to the shikaris told them to dismount 
from the elephant and noose the snake. With an exclamation of 
horror the two men said it would be quite impossible for them 
to do this. 'Don't be frightened, 1 Wyndham said, adding that if 
the snake showed any sign of attacking them he would shoot it 
— he was armed with a heavy rifle. This, however, did not 
appeal to the men, so turning to me Wyndham asked me if I 
would like to help them. Very emphatically I assured him there 
was nothing in all the world that I would like less, so handing 
his rifle to me he joined the two men on the ground. 

I greatly regret that instead of the rifle I did not have movie 
camera in my hands to make a record of the following few 
minutes, for I have never witnessed I more amusing 
scene. Wyndham's plan was to noose the python's tail and haul 
it to dry land, and then tie it up so that it could be loaded on to 
the elephant. When he explained this plan to the 
two shikaris they handed the noose to Wyndham and said that 
if he would pass the noose under the snake's tail they would 
haul on the rope. Wyndham, however, was firm in his opinion 
that the noosing could be done more expertly by 



the shikaris. Eventually; after a lot of advancing and retreating 
and dumb play to avoid alarming the python, all three men 
entered the water, each attempting to hold the rope as far away 
from the noose as possible, and very gingerly they approached 
the python upstream. When they got to within an arm's length 
of it, and while each was urging the other to take the noose and 
pass it under the tail, the python raised its head a foot or two 
out of the water, and started to turn and glide towards them. 
With a yell of 'Bhago Sahib 1 ('Run sir') the shikaris splashed out 
of the water, followed by Wyndham, and all three dashed into 
the thick brushwood on the side of the stream while the python 
glided under the roots of a big jamun tree and disappeared 
from view, and the mahout and I nearly fell off the elephant 
laughing. 

A month later I received a letter from Wyndham informing me 
he was arriving in Kaladhungi the following day, and that he 
would like to have another try to capture the python. Geoff 
Hopkins and a friend of his who had recently arrived from 
England were with me when I received the letter, and the three 
of us set off to see if the python was still in the place where I 
had last seen it. Near the tree under the roots of which the 
python lived was a sambhar's stamping ground. On this 
ground, the earth of which had been churned to fine dust by 
the hooves of generations of sambhar, we found the python 
lying dead, killed a few minutes before our arrival by a pair of 
otters. 

The method employed by otters in killing python, and also 
crocodiles, for sport— for I have never known of their using 
either of these reptiles for food— is to approach, one on either 
side of their intended victim. When the python or crocodile 
turns its head to defend itself against the attack of, say, the 
otter on the right, the otter on the left jumps in— otter are very 
agile— and takes a bite at the victim's neck as close to its head 
as possible. Then when the victim turns and tries to defend 
itself against its assailant on the left the one on the right jumps 
in and takes a bite. In this way, biting alternately and a little at 



a time, the neck of the victim is bitten away right down to the 
bone before it is dispatched, for both python and crocodiles are 
very tenacious of life. 

In the case I am narrating the python measured 17 feet 6 
inches in length and 26 inches in girth, and the pair of otters 
must have run a considerable risk while killing it. Otter, 
however, are big-hearted animals and quite possibly — like 
human beings — they value their sport in proportion to the risk 
involved. 

The second instance concerns a big bull elephant and a pair of 
tigers, and unless my theory of 'sport' is accepted I can give no 
reason for the encounter between the lord and the king and 
queen of the Indian jungle. The encounter received wide 
publicity in the Indian press and many letters on the subject 
were written by renowned sportsmen to the editors of The 
Pioneer and The Statesman. The theories advanced for the 
encounter were: old vendetta, revenge for the killing of a cub, 
and killing for food. None of the writers of the articles and 
letters witnessed the encounter, and as a similar case from 
which deductions might have been made had never been 
known, the theories remained just theories and proved nothing. 

I first heard of the encounter between the elephant and the 
tigers, which resulted in the death of the elephant, when the 
Superintendent, Tarai, and Bhabar asked me if it would take 
200 gallons of paraffin oil to cremate the body of an elephant. 
Inquiries at the Superintendent's office in Naini Tal elicited the 
information that an elephant had been killed by the tigers at 
Tanakpur on rocky ground where it could not be buried, hence 
the claim for the cost of cremating it. This information was 
intensely interesting to me hut unfortunately the trail was ten 
days old, and, further, the evidence had been burnt and heavy 
rain had obliterated all tracks. 

The Naib-Tahsildar of Tanakpur, who had heard but not 
witnessed the encounter, was a friend of mine and I am 
indebted to him for the particulars that enable me to narrate 



the incident. 


Tanakpur, terminus of a branch line of the Oudh-Tirhut Railway 
and a trading centre of considerable importance, is situated on 
the right bank of the Sarda river where it emerges from the 
foothills. Thirty years ago the river flowed along the foot of the 
high bank on which Tanakpur is built, but like all big rivers 
where they leave the foothills the Sarda keeps making new 
channels for itself, and at the time these events took place the 
river was two miles from Tanakpur. Between the main bank, 
which is about a hundred feet high, and the river there were 
several small channels and on the islands formed by these 
channels there was moderate to heavy tree, scrub, and grass 
jungle. 

One day two malhas (boatmen) living in Tanakpur went to 
the Sarda river to net fish. They stayed out longer than they had 
intended and the sun was setting when they started on their 
two-mile walk home. On emerging from a dense patch of grass 
on to the last channel that lay between them and the high 
bank, they saw two tigers standing on the far side ol the 
channel, which here was about forty yards wide, with a trickle 
of water in it, and as the tigers were between them and their 
objective the men crouched down where they were, intending 
to wait until the tigers moved away. These men had seen tigers 
on many occasions and were not unduly alarmed. This point is 
important for when anyone suffers from nerves in a jungle, 
imagination is liable to play strange tricks. At this stage of the 
proceedings there was still a little light from the recently set 
sun, and the full moon having just risen behind the two men the 
tigers standing on the open ground were in clear view. 

Presently there was a movement in the grass through which 
they had just come and out on to their side of the channel, 
stepped an elephant with big tusks. This tusker was well known 
in the Tanakpur forests and it had made itself unpopular with 
the Forest Department owing to its habit of pulling down the 
pillars supporting the roof of the Chene forest bungalow. It was 
not, however, a rogue in the sense of molesting human beings. 



When the elephant stepped out on to the channel and saw the 
tigers on the far side it raised its trunk and trumpeted and 
started to move towards them. The tigers now turned to face 
the elephant and as it approached them one demonstrated in 
front of it while the other circled round behind and sprang on 
its back. Swinging its head round, the elephant tried to get at 
the tiger on its back with its trunk, and the one in front then 
sprang on to its head. The elephant was now screaming with 
rage, while the tigers were giving vent to full-throated roars. 
When tigers roar with anger it is a very terrifying sound, and 
since the screaming of the maddened elephant was added to 
this terrifying sound, it is little wonder that the malhas lost 
their nerve and, abandoning their nets and catch of fish, 
sprinted for Tanakpur at their best speed. 

In Tanakpur preparations were being made for the evening 
meal when the sounds of the fight were first heard. Shortly 
thereafter, when the malhas arrived with the news that an 
elephant and two tigers were fighting, a few bold spirits went 
to the edge of the high bank to try to see the fight. When it was 
realized, however, that the contestants were coming towards 
them, a stampede took place and in a few minutes every door 
in Tanakpur was fast closed. Opinions on the duration of the 
fight differed. Some maintained that it lasted all night, while 
others maintained that it ended at midnight. Mr Matheson, a 
retired gentleman whose bungalow was on the high bank 
immediately above where the fight took place, said it lasted for 
many hours, and that he had never heard more appalling or 
terrifying sounds. Guns shots were heard during the night, but 
it is not clear whether they were fired by the police or by Mr 
Matheson; anyway, they did not have the desired effect of 
stopping the fight and driving the animals away. 

In the morning the residents of Tanakpur again assembled on 
the high ground, and at the foot of the hundred-foot boulder- 
strewn bank they saw the elephant lying dead. From the 
injuries described by the Naib-Tahsildar, it was evident that it 
had died of loss of blood. No portion of the elephant had been 



eaten, and no dead or injured tigers were found at the time or 
subsequently in the vicinity of Tanakpur. 

I do not think that the tigers, at the onset, had any intention of 
killing the elephant. The theory of an old vendetta, anger at the 
killing of a cub, and killing for food are not convincing. The fact 
remains, however, that a big bull elephant, carrying tusks 
weighing ninety pounds, was killed near Tanakpur by two 
tigers and I am of the opinion that what started as a lark— by a 
pair of mating tigers when an elephant tried to shoo them out 
of his way — developed into a real fight. I am also of the 
opinion that when the second tiger sprang on the elephant's 
head it clawed out the elephant's eyes and that thereafter the 
blinded animal dashed about aimlessly until it came to the high 
bank. Here on the round loose boulders, which afforded no 
foothold, it was practically anchored and at the mercy of the 
tigers who — possibly because of injuries received in the fight 
— showed no mercy. 

All carnivorous animals kill their victims with their teeth, and 
those that stalk their prey depend on their claws not only to 
catch and hold but also, on occasion, to disable a victim before 
dispatching it with their teeth. The act of killing, except in the 
case of animals that run down their prey, is so seldom 
witnessed in the jungles, and, when witnessed, the initial 
movements of the killer are so rapid and consequently so 
difficult to follow that after witnessing, possibly, twenty kills by 
tigers and leopards I can give no precise description of the 
movements of the killer at the actual moment of contact with 
its victim. In only one of the cases I have witnessed— 
a cheetal hind feeding down-wind— was a head-on attack 
made. This is understandable, for the horns of the animals 
usually killed by tigers and leopards are capable of inflicting 
very serious wounds. The attacks in the other cases witnessed 
were made by the killers coming up from behind, or at an 
angle, and with a singh spring or short rush getting hold of 
their victims with their claws, and then with a lightning-fast 
movement seizing them by the throat and bringing them to the 



ground. 

In bringing an animal to the ground great care has to be 
exercised, for a full-grown sambhar or cheetal could with a 
single kick disembowel a tiger or a leopard. To avoid injury, and 
also to prevent the victim from struggling to its feet, the head, 
in the act of pulling it to the ground, is twisted round, as shown 
in the sketch. When an animal is thus brought down and held it 
can kick indefinitely without doing its assailant any injury, and 
it cannot rise or roll over without dislocating its neck. It 
occasionally happens that when a heavy animal is brought to 
the ground the fall dislocates the neck, and it also occasionally 
happens that the neck is dislocated by the canine teeth of the 
assailant. When the neck is not dislocated either by its fall or 
by the attacker's teeth, the victim is killed by strangulation. 

I have never seen an animal hamstrung by a leopard, but have 
seen many cases of hamstringing by tigers. In all those cases 
the hamstringing was done by the claws and not by the teeth of 
tigers. A friend once brought me news of the killing of one of 
his cows on the Semdhar ridge six miles from Naini Tal. He 
owned a big herd of cattle and had seen many kills by tigers 
and leopards and from the absence of injuries on this particular 
cow's neck and from the way the flesh had been torn in shreds 
he suspected that it had been killed and partly eaten by some 
unknown animal. The day was still young when he brought me 
the news, and two hours later we arrived at the kill. The cow, a 
full-grown animal, had been killed on a fifty-foot-wide fire track 
and no attempt had been made to drag it away. When the 
condition of the kill had been described to me I had come to the 
conclusion that the cow had been killed by a Himalayan black 
bear. Bears are not habitual meat-eaters but they do 
occasionally kill, and not being equipped for killing, as tigers 
and leopards are, their method of killing is very clumsy. The 
cow had not been killed by a bear, however, but by a tiger, and 
killed in a very unusual way. It had first been hamstrung, and 
then killed by being disembowelled. Having killed the cow the 
tiger had eaten a portion of the hindquarters by tearing away 



the flesh with its claw. Tracking on the hard ground was not 
possible, so I spent the rest of the day searching the 
surrounding forests to try to get a shot at the tiger on foot. 
Near sundown I returned to the kill and sat up over it all night 
on the branch of a tree. The tiger did not return to his kill, nor 
did he return to the kills of nine other animals— six cows and 
three young buffaloes— that he killed in identically the same 
way. 

This method of killing was intensely cruel from a human 
being's point of view, but not from the point of view of the tiger. 
He had to kill to provide himself with food, and his method of 
killing was dependent on his physical condition. The fact that 
the tiger could not use his canine teeth to kill, or to drag away 
his kills, and that he had to use his claws instead of his teeth to 
tear the flesh from his kills, was proof that he was suffering 
from some physical defect. This defect, I am convinced, had 
resulted from a carelessly fired high velocity bullet having shot 
away a portion of his lower jaw. I came to this conviction on 
seeing the tiger's first kill and my conviction— that he was 
wounded and that he was still suffering from his wound— was 
strengthened by the lengthening period between the kills, and 
the fact that he was able to eat less from each succeeding kill. 
His wound had evidently been received over a kill and this 
would account for his never returning for a second meal. The 
killing stopped after the tenth kill and as no tiger was shot or 
found dead in that area I am inclined to think that the tiger 
crawled away into a cave, of which there were many on a 
nearby hill, and there succumbed to his wound. 

Admittedly this was an unusual case, but it was not the only 
case I know of hamstringing, for two of the biggest buffaloes I 
have ever seen killed by tigers had been hamstrung by the 
claws of tigers before being pulled down and killed by the 
tiger's teeth. 



Chapter Six 

WHEN THE RUBBER OF THE catapult Tom gave me perished, 

I made myself a pellet bow. The difference between a bow that 
shoots a pellet and one that shoots an arrow is that the former 
is shorter and stiffer, and that it has two strings between which 
a small square of webbing is fixed to hold the pellet. Practice is 
needed to shoot with a pellet bow, for if the wrist of the hand 
holding the bow is not turned at the exact moment that the 
pellet is released, very serious injury can result to the thumb of 
the bow hand. A pellet bow can shoot with twice the velocity 
that a catapult can, but it is not as accurate as a catapult. The 
Naini Tal Treasury, which was guarded by Gurkhas of the 
Regular Army, was just across the road from our summer home. 
The Gurkhas were keen pellet bowmen and I was often invited 
into the Treasury grounds to compete with them. In the 
grounds was a short wooden post on which was hung a great 
circular gong for striking the hours. On this post a match-box 
used to be placed and from a range of twenty yards the man 
selected to compete with me, and I, each fired one shot in turn. 
The Havildar of the guard, a short stocky man as strong as a 
bull, was the best shot of them all, but— much to the delight of 
the onlookers— he never succeeded in beating me. 

Necessity compelled me to use a pellet bow, and though I 
acquired sufficient accuracy with it to continue my collection of 
birds, I never took to it as I had taken to a catapult, and after 
reading Fennimore Cooper's thrilling books I supplemented my 
pellet bow with a bow to project arrows. If Cooper's Red 
Indians could shoot game with an arrow, I saw no reason why I 
should not be able to do the same. The people in our part of 
India do not use bows and arrows so I had no pattern to work 
on; however, after several attempts I made a bow to my liking 
and with this bow and two arrows— tipped with sharp nails— I 
set out to emulate a Red Indian. I had no illusions about the 
killing powers of my arrows, or their defensive value, so I 
walked warily, for in addition to the jungle fowl and peafowl 
that I hoped to shoot, there were in our jungles many animals 



of which I was mightily afraid. To enable me to approach the 
game I wanted to shoot, and to assist me in seeking protection 
in trees when danger threatened, I discarded my shoes, for 
there were no thin rubber-soled shoes in those days and the 
choice lay between bare feet and hard leather shoes which 
were neither suitable for stalking in nor for climbing trees. 

Two watercourses, dry except after heavy rain, ran down from 
the foothills and met at the lower end of our estate. Both had 
sandy beds and in the jungle between them, which was a 
quarter of a mile wide at the bottom end, a mile wide at the top 
end, and two miles long, was game of all kinds. The canal in 
which the girls bathed formed a boundary between our estate 
and the jungle, and I had only to cross it by a fallen tree to get 
in touch with the game, which included the birds I hoped to 
shoot. In later years, when I had a cine-camera, I spent many 
days on a tree on our side of the canal, trying to film tigers that 
came down to the canal to drink. And it was in this jungle that I 
shot my last tiger, on my release from the army after Hitler's 
war. The tiger killed— at different times— a horse, a calf, and 
two bullocks, and as it resisted all my attempts to drive it away 
I shot it. Sister Maggie doubted my ability to hold a rifle steady 
for many forms of malaria contracted in many jungles had, she 
thought, impaired the steadiness of my hands. However, to 
make quite sure of my shot I called the tiger up for judgement, 
found it guilty, and shot it through the eye as it was looking at 
me at the range of a few feet. It was murder, of course, but 
justifiable murder; for though I was willing to let the tiger live 
in the dense patch of lantana it had selected for its home— two 
hundred yards from the village— and pay compensation for all 
the animals it killed, it was difficult to replace these animals 
owing to the country-wide shortage of farm animals brought 
about by the war, and— as I have said— the tiger resisted all 
my attempts to drive it away. 

Magog and I had explored the strip of jungle between the two 
watercourses very thoroughly and I knew all the places to be 
avoided; even so, I did not consider it was safe to cross the 



canal by the fallen tree and go hunting jungle-fowl and peafowl 
until I had satisfied myself that there were no tigers in it. And 
this I did by examining the watercourse on the left-hand side of 
the jungle. The tigers that frequented the strip invariably came 
from the west at about sunset and, unless they had made a kill, 
returned before sunrise to the heavy jungle from which they 
had come. By examining the sandy stretches along the bed of 
this watercourse it was possible to ascertain whether a tiger 
had crossed into the jungle that I looked on as my private 
preserve, and, if so, whether it had remained or left. On the 
occasions on which I found only a one-way track I left the 
jungle severely alone and went elsewhere to look for birds. 

This watercourse was of never-ending interest to me for, in 
addition to tigers, all the animals and all the crawling creatures 
that lived in the jungles that stretched for many miles on either 
side, crossed it, and in doing so left a photographic record of 
their passage. It was here, first armed with a catapult, then 
with a bow, later with a muzzle-loader, and later still with a 
modern rifle, that I added— a little at a time— to my store of 
jungle lore. Starting out as the sun was rising, and moving 
noiselessly on my bare feet, I saw at one time or anodier all the 
animals and all the crawling creatures that crossed die 
watercourse, until a day came when I was able to identify each 
by the track it made. But here was only a small beginning for I 
had yet to learn the habits of the animals, their language, and 
the part they played in the scheme of nature. And while I was 
accumulating knowledge of these interesting subjects I was 
also absorbing the language of the birds and understanding 
their functions in nature's garden. 

The first thing I did then was to divide the birds and animals 
and the crawling creatures into groups. Starting with the birds, 
I divided them into six groups: 

(a) Birds that beautified nature's garden. In this group I put 
minivets, orioles, and sunbirds. 

(b) Birds that filled the garden with melody: thrushes, robins. 



and shamas. 


(c) Birds that regenerated the garden: barbets, hornbills, 
and bulbuls. 

(d) Birds that warned of danger: drongos, red jungle-fowl, and 
babblers. 

(e) Birds that maintained the balance in nature: eagles, hawks, 
and owls. 

(f) Birds that performed the duty of scavengers: vultures, kites, 
and crows. 

The animals I divided into five groups: 

(g) Animals that beautified nature's garden. In this group I put 
deer, antelope, and monkeys. 

(h) Animals that helped to regenerate the garden by opening 
up and aerating the soil: bears, pigs and porcupines. 

(i) Animals that warned of danger: deer, monkeys, and 
squirrels. 

(j) Animals that maintained the balance in nature: tigers, 
leopards, and wild dogs. 

(k) Animals that acted as scavengers: hyaenas, jackals, and 
pigs. 

The crawling creatures I divided into two groups: 

(l) Poisonous snakes. In this group I put cobras, kraits, and 
vipers. 

(m) Non-poisonous snakes: Pythons, grass-snakes, 
and dhamin (rat snakes). 

Having divided the principal birds and animals into groups 
according to the functions they performed, the other members 
of the jungle folk that performed similar duties were added— 
as my knowledge increased— to the groups to which they 



belonged. The next step was to make myself familiar with the 
language of the jungle folk, and to learn to imitate the calls of 
those birds and animals whose calls are within the range of 
human lips and of a human throat. All birds and all animals 
have their own language and though— with few exceptions— 
one species cannot speak the language of another species, all 
the jungle folk understand each other's language. The best 
three of the exceptions are, the racket-tailed drongo, the 
rufous-backed shrike, and the gold-fronted green bulbul. To 
bird lovers the racket-tailed drongo is a never-ending source of 
pleasure and interest for, in addition to being the most 
courageous bird in our jungles, he can imitate to perfection the 
calls of most birds and of one animal, the cheetal, and he has a 
great sense of humour. Attaching himself to a flock of ground¬ 
feeding birds— jungle-fowl, babblers, or thrushes— he takes up 
a commanding position on a dead branch and, while regaling 
the jungle with his own songs and the songs of the other birds, 
keeps a sharp look-out for enemies in the way of hawks, cats, 
snakes, and small boys armed with catapults, and his warning 
of the approach of danger is never disregarded. His services 
are not disinterested, for in return for protection he expects 
the flock he is guarding to provide him with food. His sharp 
eyes miss nothing, and the moment he sees that one of the 
birds industriously scratching up or turning over the dead 
leaves below him has unearthed a fat centipede or a juicy 
scorpion he darts at it screaming like a hawk, or screaming as 
a bird of the species he is trying to dispossess does when 
caught by a hawk. Nine times out of ten he succeeds in 
wresting the prize from the finder, and returning to his perch 
kills and eats the titbit at his leisure, and having done so 
continues his interrupted song. 

Racket-tailed drongos are also found in association 

with cheetal, feeding on the grasshoppers and other winged 

insects disturbed by the deer; and having heard 

the cheetal give their alarm call on seeing a leopard or a tiger, 

he learns the call and repeats it with great exactitude. I was 



present on one occasion when a leopard killed a 
yearling cheetal. Moving the leopard away for a few hundred 
yards I returned to the kill and breaking down a small bush tied 
the kill to the stump, and as there were no suitable trees 
nearby I sat on the ground with my back to a bush and my cine¬ 
camera resting on my drawn-up knees. Presendy a racket-tailed 
drongo arrived in company with a flock of white-throated 
laughing thrush. On catching sight of the kill the drongo came 
close for a better look at it and, in doing so, saw me. The kill 
was a natural sight to him but my presence appeared to puzzle 
him; however, after satisfying himself that I did not look 
dangerous he flew back to the white-throats who were 
chattering noisily on the ground. The birds were on my left and 
I was expecting the leopard to appear from my right front when 
suddenly the drongo gave the alarm call of a cheetal, on 
hearing which the white-throats— some fifty in number— rose 
in a body and went screaming into the branches above them, 
whence they started giving their alarm call. By watching the 
drongo I was able to follow every move of the unseen leopard 
who, annoyed by the baiting of the birds, worked round until he 
was immediately behind me. The bush in front of which I was 
sitting had few leaves on it, and on catching sight of me the 
leopard gave a low growl and retreated into the jungle, 
followed by the drongo. The drongo was now thoroughly 
enjoying himself and his rendering of the alarm call 
of cheetal filled me with admiration and with envy, for though I 
could have competed with him on a single call I could not have 
rung the changes on the different ages of the deer he was 
imitating as quickly or as smoothly as he was doing. 

When taking up my position on the ground, I knew the leopard 
would see me the moment he returned to his kill, and I 
expected to get my picture while he was trying to take the kill 
away. After shaking off the drongo the leopard returned a 
second time and though, by growling fiercely, he showed his 
resentment at my presence and at the sound my camera made, 

I succeeded in exposing fifty feet of film— at a range of twenty 



yards— while he was struggling to break the creeper with 
which I had tied the kill to the stump. 

I do not know if racket-tailed drongos can learn to talk, but I do 
know that they can learn to whistle tunes. Some years ago the 
Anglo-Indian station-master of Mankapur Junction on the 
Bengal and North-Western Railway now the Oudh-Tirhut 
Railway supplemented his income by teaching drongos 
and shamas to whistle tunes. Trains halted at the junction for 
breakfast and lunch and it was a common sight to see 
passengers running over to the station-master's bungalow to 
hear his birds, and returning with a cage containing a bird that 
whistled the tune they fancied most. For these birds, plus an 
ornate cage, the station-master charged a flat rate of thirty 
rupees. 



Chapter Seven 

HAVING STATED THAT THE BOOK of Nature has no beginning 
and no end, I would be the last to claim that I have learned all 
that is to be learnt of any of the subjects dealt with in Jungle 
Lore, or that the book contains any expert knowledge. But 
having spent so much of my life with nature, and having made 
a hobby of jungle lore, I have observed a little knowledge, and 
that knowledge I am now imparting without reservations. I do 
not flatter myself that all who read these pages will agree with 
my deductions and statements, but that need be no cause for 
quarrel, for no two or more people look at any object with the 
same eyes. Take, for example, three people looking at a rose. 
One will see only the colour of the flower, another will see only 
the shape, while the third will see both the colour and the 
shape. All three will have seen what they were looking for, and 
all three will have been right. When the present Prime Minister 
of the United Provinces of India and I differed on a subject 
under discussion, he said, 'We can agree to differ on this point, 
and still remain friends. 1 So if any reader differs with me on 
any point I raise, let us take the Prime Minister's advice and 
remain friends. 

In the beginning I found it difficult to distinguish between the 
tracks of different animals that left more or less similar 
impressions on the bed of the watercourse. For instance, the 
tracks of a young sambhar and of a young blue-bull are very 
similar to the tracks of a big pig. But by watching each of these 
animals crossing the watercourse and then examining its tracks 
I soon found that I could, at a glance, distinguish between the 
tracks of a pig and the tracks of all the other cloven-hoofed 
animals in the jungle. A pig, like all deer, has rudimentary hoofs 
at the back of the main hoofs. In a pig these rudimentary hoofs 
are longer than they are in a deer, and except when a pig is 
crossing hard ground these rudimentary hoofs leave a distinct 
impression, whereas in the case of deer the rudimentary hoofs 
only leave an impression when the main hoofs have sunk in soft 
ground. Again, until one has gained some experience it is 



difficult to tell the difference between the pug marks of a tiger 
cub, and the pug marks of a leopard, when both are of the 
same superficial area. The difference between two pug marks 
can be determined by looking at the imprint of the toes, for the 
toes of a tiger cub are larger and out of all proportion to the 
toes of a leopard when both pug marks cover the same 
superficial area. 

The tracks of hyaenas and those of wild dogs are often 
confused with the tracks of leopards. Here— when there is any 
doubt— two fundamental rules can be applied to determine the 
species of the animal that has made the track: 

(a) All animals that run down their prey have big toes as 
compared with their pads, and all animals that stalk their prey 
have small toes as compared with their pads. 

(b) The imprint of the toe-nails shows in the tracks of all 
animals that run down their prey, and— except when startled, 
or when in the act of springing— the imprint of the claws does 
not show in the tracks of animals that stalk their prey. 

If you look at the tracks of a house dog and cat, you will see 
what I mean by big toes and small pads in the track of the 
former, and small toes and big pads in the track of the latter. 

When living in an area in which snakes are plentiful, it is 
advisable on occasion to know— from its tracks— in which 
direction the snake has gone and to determine, more or less 
accurately, if the snake was poisonous or nonpoisonous. The 
girth of a snake can also be assessed from its track. I will deal 
with these three points in the order in which I have mentioned 
them: 

(a) Direction: For the purpose of my illustration I should like 
you to imagine a field of closely-planted lucern, six inches high. 
If you were to run a roller across the field from right to left you 
would notice that the lucern plants were laid flat in the 
direction in which the roller had been run, so even if you had 
not been present when the roller was being run across the field 



you would have no difficulty in knowing that it had been run 
from right to left. If you are not blessed with good eyesight, 
take a magnifying glass and look carefully at any patch of sand 
or dust, and you will note that particles of the sand or dust 
stand up higher than other particles. Call these particles that 
stand upright the 'pile'. When a snake passes over sand or dust 
it lays the pile flat in the direction in which it has gone, in the 
same way as the roller did with the lucern. Every surface like 
sand, dust, ashes, and so on, on which a snake leaves a track, 
has a pile on it, and remembering this, you can always tell in 
which direction a snake has gone by looking at the flattened 
pile. 

(b) Poisonous or non-poisonous: You will note that I have said 
you can determine more or less accurately from the track of a 
snake whether it is poisonous or non-poisonous. There is no 
hard and fast rule— as in the case of direction— by which the 
species of a snake can be determined from its track. For though 
I have only seen the tracks of a few of the three hundred or 
more varieties of snakes in India, I know of two exceptions 
from the general rule I apply to determine the species from the 
track. The two exceptions are the hamadryad or king cobra in 
the case of poisonous snakes, and the python in the case of 
non-poisonous snakes. 

Poisonous snakes, with the exception I have mentioned, lie in 
wait for their victims or approach them unseen. They therefore 
have no need for speed and move over the ground 
comparatively slowly, and when a snake moves slowly it can 
only do so by excessive wriggling. Take for example a Russell's 
Viper, or a krait, India's most deadly snake. If you watch one of 
these snakes moving over the ground, say over sand or dust, 
you will note that it travels in a series of short curves, and if 
you examine the track left by the snake, you will observe that it 
shows as a series of short curves. When, therefore, you see the 
track of a snake that shows excessive wriggling, you can be 
reasonably sure it is the track of a poisonous snake. 
Hamadryads live almost exclusively on other snakes and as 



many of their intended victims can move with speed, the 
hamadryad has acquired a turn of speed which is said to equal 
that of a horse. On this point I am ignorant for I have never 
chased or been chased on horseback by this king of snakes, 
which attains a length of seventeen feet. However, having 
killed a few hamadryads up to fourteen feet in length, I know 
they can travel fast, and this turn of speed I believe they have 
acquired to enable them to catch other fast-moving snakes. 
Non-poisonous snakes, with the exception I have mentioned, 
are slim-built, active, and speedy; and some, like the dhamin or 
rat snake and the black rock snake, can cover the ground at 
incredible speed. Speed in non-poisonous snakes may be 
essential partly to secure their prey and partly to outstrip their 
enemies, of whom they have many. When a snake covers the 
ground at great speed it leaves a more or less straight track, 
and where there are slight inequalities in the ground the belly 
of the snake only touches the hills, and not the valleys. When, 
therefore, you see a track that is comparatively straight you 
can be reasonably sure it is the track of a non-poisonous snake. 
The only poisonous snake whose track you might confuse with 
that of a non-poisonous one is a hamadryad, but the chances of 
your doing so are small, for the hamadryad is rare and is found 
only in a few localities. 

(c) Girth: To estimate the girth of a snake from the track it 
makes, measure the width of the track at several points, and 
multiply the mean width by four. This will give the girth of the 
snake, though only approximately, for the width of the track 
will depend on the surface on which it is made. For instance, if 
the track is made on a light film of dust, it will be narrower 
than it would be if made on deep dust. 

In India twenty thousand people die each year of snake-bite. Of 
these twenty thousand, I believe only half die of snake poison; 
the other half die of shock or fright, or a combination of the 
two, from the bite of non-poisonous snakes. Though Indians 
have lived with snakes for thousands of years it is surprising 
how little they know about them, and with very few exceptions 



Indians look upon all snakes as poisonous. The shock of a bite 
from a big snake is considerable, and when in addition to the 
shock the victim jumps to the conclusion that he has been 
bitten by a poisonous snake and that he is doomed, it is not 
surprising that such a large number of people succumb— as I 
believe they do— to the bite of non-poisonous snakes. 

In most villages in India there are men who are credited with 
being able to cure people bitten by snakes. As only some ten 
per cent of the snakes in India are poisonous, these men build 
up a great reputation for themselves. They give their services 
free and do good work among the poor, for though they cannot 
with their nostrums and charms cure anyone who has received 
a lethal dose of snake poison, they do save the lives of many 
people bitten by non-poisonous snakes, by infusing them with 
courage and confidence. 

Most hospitals in India are equipped to deal with snake-bite 
victims, but as the poor have no means of transport other than 
their own legs or the shoulders of companions, in many cases 
they arrive at hospital when they have passed the stage at 
which expert medical treatment would be of benefit to them. In 
all hospitals charts are exhibited of poisonous snakes. Except 
where rewards are paid for the destruction of poisonous snakes 
these charts are of little value, for most people are bitten while 
moving about barefoot at night, and therefore do not see the 
snakes that have bitten them. And again, there is a widespread 
belief that if the person bitten kills the snake, the snake in turn 
will kill him, so few snakes are produced in hospitals by snake¬ 
bite victims to enable doctors to determine whether the patient 
was bitten by a poisonous or a non-poisonous species. 

My method— when I am in doubt— of determining whether a 
snake is poisonous or non-poisonous, is to kill it and look at its 
mouth. If it has two rows of teeth I class it as non-poisonous; 
while if it has two fangs on the upper jaw— hinged in the viper 
family and fixed in the cobra family— I class it as poisonous. A 
bite from the former class exhibits a number of teeth-marks; a 



bite from the latter class exhibits two fang-marks, though in 
some cases only one fang-mark, as happens occasionally when 
the striker is not at right angles to the object struck, or when 
the object struck, say a finger or a toe, is too small for both 
fangs to make contact. 



Chapter Eight 

LEARNING THE CALLS OF THE jungle folk was not difficult, 
nor was it difficult to imitate some of the birds and a few of the 
animals, for I had a good ear, and being young my lips and 
vocal chords were pliant. Learning the calls and being able to 
identify every bird and animal by its call was not sufficient, 
however, for, with the exception of those birds whose function 
it is to fill nature's garden with melody, birds and animals do 
not call without a reason, and the call differs according to the 
reason for which it is made. 

I was sitting one day on a tree watching a herd of cheetal in an 
open glade. There were fifteen stags and hinds in the herd, and 
five young ones all about the same age. One of the young ones 
that had been sleeping in the sun got to its feet, stretched 
itself, and kicking up its heels raced across the glade towards a 
fallen tree; this was a signal to the other young ones that a 
game of 'follow the leader 1 was on. Nose to tail the five cleared 
the tree, circled around, raced through the glade and again 
cleared the tree. After the second jump the leader carried on 
into the jungle beyond, followed by its companions. A hind that 
had bean lying down now got to her feet, looked in the 
direction in which the young ones had gone, and gave a sharp 
bark. The bark brought the truants racing back to the glade, 
but it had not the slightest effect on the grown animals, who 
continued to lie down or to crop the short grass. A footpath 
used by woodcutters passed within a short distance of the 
glade and presently along this path came a man carrying an 
axe over his shoulder. From my raised position I saw the man 
while he was still a long way off, for the jungle in the direction 
in which he was coming was comparatively open. When the 
man was a hundred yards from the glade one of the hinds saw 
him; gave a sharp bark and the whole herd without a moment's 
hesitation dashed away into thick cover. 

The bark of the anxious mother recalling her young one and the 
bark of the hind warning the herd of the presence of a human 



being had, to my untrained ears, sounded exactly alike and it 
was not until I had gained experience that I detected that the 
difference in the call of animals, and also of birds, when calling 
for different reasons was not to be found in the call itself, but in 
the intonation of the call. A dog barks, and all who hear it know 
it is barking to welcome its master; or barking with excitement 
at being taken for a run; or barking with frustration at a treed 
cat; or barking with anger at a stranger; or just barking 
because it is chained up. In all these cases it is the intonation 
of the bark that enables the hearer to determine why the dog is 
barking. 

When I had absorbed sufficient knowledge to enable me to 
identify all the jungle folk by their calls, ascribe a reason for 
the call, and imitate many of them sufficiently well to get some 
birds and a few animals to come to me or to follow me, the 
jungles took on an added interest, for not only was I able to 
take an interest in the surroundings within sight but also in the 
surroundings to the limit of my hearing. But first it was 
necessary to be able to locate, or pinpoint sound. Animals who 
live day and night with fear can pinpoint sound with exactitude, 
and fear can teach human beings to do the same. Sounds that 
are repeated— as, for instance, a langorbarking at a leopard, or 
a cheetal barking at a suspicious movement, or a peafowl 
calling at a tiger— are not difficult to locate, nor do they 
indicate immediate danger calling for instant action. It is the 
sound that is only heard once, like the snapping of a twig, a low 
growl, or the single warning call of bird or of animal, that is 
difficult to locate, is of immediate danger, and calls for instant 
action. Having acguired the ability— through fear— of being 
able to pinpoint sound, that is, to assess the exact direction and 
distance of all sounds heard, I was able to follow the movement 
of unseen leopards and tigers, whether when in the jungle by 
daylight, or in bed at night, for the situation of our home 
enabled me to hear all the jungle sounds. 

In return for the birds I collected for him, Stephen Dease gave 
me the gun I have already referred to. This gun was a double- 



barrelled muzzle-loader which in its young days must 
have been quite a good weapon, but whose efficiency had been 
reduced by half by an over-charge of powder which had split 
the right barrel. The explosion had also evidently broken the 
stock, and when Stephen passed the old warrior over to me the 
barrels and stock were held precariously together with 
lappings of brass wire. However, as Kunwar Singh— my 
poacher friend— pointed out to me, the left barrel was 
sound and capable of rendering good service; a prediction that 
proved correct for I kept the larder for a considerable family 
supplied for two winters with jungle-fowl and pea-fowl, and on 
one memorable occasion I crept up close enough to a cheetal to 
shoot it with No. 4 shot. 

I am not ashamed to admit that all the birds I shot with the 
muzzle-loader were shot sitting. Ammunition was not easy to 
come by and to eke out my scanty supply every shot had to be 
effective. If during a morning or an evening I fired two or three 
shots, I brought back two or three birds, and no other method 
of shooting the birds could possibly have given me more 
pleasure. 

I was returning one evening from the foothills at the upper end 
of the jungle between the two watercourses I have mentioned. 
The weather for several weeks had been very dry, making 
stalking difficult, and the sun was near setting when I turned 
my face for home, with a jungle-fowl and a kalege pheasant in 
the string bag in which I carried my powder and shot. A blue- 
black cloud was showing over a shoulder of the foothills to the 
west as I emerged from a deep ravine in which I had shot 
the kalege pheasant. This ominous-looking cloud, following a 
spell of dry weather and a sultry day when not a leaf or a blade 
of grass had stirred, presaged a hailstorm. Hailstorms along 
the foothills are feared by man and beast, for in a few minutes 
a belt ol cultivation, maybe only a quarter of a mile wide or 
maybe ten miles, can be laid waste and children and cattle 
killed if caught in the open. I have never seen a wild animal 
killed by hailstones, hut I have seen the jungle strewn with 



dead birds, including vultures and peafowl. 

I had three miles to go, but by taking a direct line for home and 
cutting the corners in the winding game-tracks I could reduce 
the distance by half a mile. I was now facing the oncoming 
blue-black cloud, across the face of which forked lightning was 
continuous. The birds and animals were silent and the only 
sound to be heard as I entered a thick belt of heavy timber was 
the distant rumble of thunder. Under the dense canopy of 
leaves the light was fading and as I loped along, taking care to 
see where I placed my feet for I was running barefoot, I heard 
the wind that always precedes a hailstorm. When I was half¬ 
way through the timber the wind struck the forest, sending the 
carpet of tinder-dry dead leaves swirling along the ground with 
the noise of a suddenly released torrent of water, and at the 
same moment I heard a scream— Dansay's 'banshee', without a 
doubt. Starting on a minor note the scream developed into a 
terrifying shriek, and then died away on a long-drawn-out 
sobbing note. Some sounds have the effect of petrifying one, 
others galvanize one into instant action: the scream— which I 
placed as being above and a little behind me— had the latter 
effect on me. A few weeks previously— in company with Magog 
— I had run from a tiger as I thought I should never run again, 
but I did not know then that terror of the unknown could lend 
wings to one's feet. To my credit be it noted that I did not throw 
away my gun and the heavy string bag, and regardless of 
thorns and of stubbed toes I ran until I reached home. Thunder 
was booming overhead and the first of the hailstones were 
hissing down as I ran up the steps of the veranda, and in the 
general confusion of fastening doors and windows and making 
all secure against the storm, my breathless and excited 
condition escaped attention. 

Dansay had said that hearing the banshee brought calamity to 
the hearer and his family, and fearing that I would be blamed 
for any calamity that befell the family, I said not a word about 
my experience. Danger of any kind has an attraction for 
everyone, including small boys, and though for many days I 



avoided the area in which I had heard the banshee, a day came 
when I found myself back at the edge of the heavy timber. As 
on the evening of the storm a wind was blowing, and after I had 
been standing with my back to a tree for some minutes, I again 
heard the scream. Restraining with difficulty my impulse to run 
away, I stood trembling behind the tree and after the scream 
had been repeated a few times, I decided to creep up and have 
a look at the banshee. No calamity had resulted from my 
hearing her and I thought that if by chance she saw me now, 
and saw that I was a very small boy, he would not kill me; so— 
with my heart beating in my throat— I crept forward as slowly 
and as noiselessly as a shadow, until I saw Dansay's banshee. 

In some violent storm of long ago a giant of the forest had been 
partly uprooted and had been prevented from crashing to the 
ground by falling across another and slightly smaller giant. The 
weight of the bigger tree had given the smaller tree a 
permanent bend, and when a gust of wind lifted the bigger one 
and then released it, it swayed back on to the supporting tree. 
At the point of impact the wood of both trees had died and 
worn as smooth as glass, and it was the friction between these 
two smooth surfaces that was emitting the terrifying scream. 
Not until I had laid the gun on the ground and climbed the 
leaning tree and sat on it while the scream was being repeated 
below me, was I satisfied that I had found the terror that was 
always at the back of my mind when I was alone in the jungles. 
From that day I date the desire I acquired of following up and 
getting to the bottom of every unusual thing I saw or heard in 
the jungles and for this I am grateful to Dansay for, by 
frightening me with his banshee, he started me on the 
compiling of many exciting and interesting jungle detective 
stories. 

Detective stories of fiction usually start with the evidence 
of some violent crime or attempted crime, and the enthralled 
reader— oblivious for the time being that he is reading fiction— 
is carried along through exciting scene after scene until finally 
the criminal is detected and made to suffer for his crime. My 



jungle detective stories do not start in the same way; nor do 
they always end with punishment for the criminal. I will select 
at random two of these stories from memory's library. 

( 1 ) 

I was camping at a Forest Department bungalow ten miles from 
Kaladhungi and had gone out early one morning to try to shoot 
a jungle-fowl or a peafowl for the pot. To the left of the road I 
was on was a densely-wooded low hill with game of all kinds on 
it, and to the right was cultivated land with a narrow strip of 
bush-covered ground between the cultivation and the road. 
When the village folk started moving about their fields in the 
morning, birds that were feeding on the crops rose and flew 
over the road, offering excellent shots. My luck was out that 
morning, for the birds that crossed the road were out of range 
of my small bore gun, and I got to the end of the cultivation 
without firing a shot. 

While keeping an eye open for birds, I had also kept an eye on 
the road, and a hundred yards from where the chances of my 
shooting a bird ended I noted that a big male leopard had come 
down the hill from my left on to the road. For a few yards the 
leopard had kept to the left of the road, then crossed to the 
right and lain down near a bush. From this point the leopard 
had gone forward for twenty yards, and again lain down by a 
bush. The behaviour of the leopard indicated that he had been 
interested in something, and quite evidently that something 
had not been on the road, for if it had he would have gone 
forward through the bushes and not along the road. Going back 
to where he had first lain I knelt down to see the view he had 
obtained from this spot. Where the cultivation and the narrow 
strip of bushes ended there was an open stretch of ground, the 
grass on which had been cropped close by village cattle. This 
stretch of ground was visible from the leopard's first viewpoint, 
and I found it was also visible from his second viewpoint, so 
what he had been interested in was evidendy on the open 
ground. 



Keeping under cover of the screen of bushes, the leopard had 
gone forward for another fifty yards to where the bushes ended 
and where a shallow depression starting at the edge of the 
road ran across the open ground. Where the bushes ended the 
leopard had lain down for some time, changing his position 
several times, and eventually he had entered the depression 
and proceeded along it, stopping and lying down frequendy. 
Thirty yards farther on the sand and dust that had been washed 
off the road into the depression ended and gave place to short 
grass. Here, from the particles of sand and dust adhering to the 
grass where the leopard had put his pads, it was reasonable to 
assume that he passed that way after the dew had started 
falling the previous evening, which would be at approximately 
7 p.m. The grass in the depression extended for only a few 
yards and the light sand and dust beyond showed no pug 
marks, so it was evident the leopard had left the depression at 
this spot. Tracking on the open ground was not possible, but 
from where the leopard had left the depression I saw he had 
gone in the direction of a few coarse tufts of grass, a foot or 
two high. Going up to the tufts, I saw at a distance of about ten 
feet the deep imprints of a sambhar's hoofs. From here on for 
thirty yards, and at regular intervals, all four hoofs of 
the sambhar hadbitten deep into the ground as would naturally 
happen if the sambhar was trying, by shock tactics, to dislodge 
something from his back. At the end of the thirty yards 
the sambhar had turned to the left and dashed straight towards 
an isolated tree on the far side of the depression. On the bark 
of this tree, and at a height of about four feet, I 
found sambhar hairs and a small splash of blood. 

I was now convinced that the leopard from his look-out on the 
hill had seen the sambhar feeding on the open ground, and 
after reconnoitring the position had set off to stalk it and, 
having sprung on its back from the cover of the tufts of grass, 
that he was now riding it until it took him to some sheltered 
spot where he could kill it and have the kill to himself. To have 
killed the sambhar where he caught it would have been easy 



but he could not have dragged a full-grown sambhar to cover— 
the hoof marks had shown me that the sambhar was full grown 
— and when daylight came he would have lost his kill, so he 
had wisely decided to ride it. Having failed to wipe the leopard 
off its back on the first tree the sambhar made three more 
attempts to get rid of his unwelcome rider before making for 
the main jungle two hundred yards away where he evidently 
hoped that bushes would accomplish what the trees had failed 
to do. Twenty yards inside the bushes, and well screened from 
the prying eyes of human beings and vultures, the leopard had 
buried his teeth in the oldsambhar hind's throat, and while 
holding on with his teeth and the claws of his fore-paws, had 
swung his body clear of the hind bringing her to the ground 
and, after killing her, had eaten his meal. The leopard was lying 
near his kill when I arrived and on seeing me moved off, but he 
had nothing to fear from me for I was out bird shooting and 
was armed with a 28-bore gun and No. 8 shot. 

I know of many instances of leopards riding animals 
they intend to kill— sambhar, cheetal, and in one instance a 
horse— but I only know of one instance of a tiger having done 
so. 

On that occasion I was camped near Mangolia Khatta, a 
cattle station twelve miles from Kaladhungi, and while I was 
having a late breakfast one morning I heard the distant boom 
of buffalo bells. Earlier in the morning, while returning to camp 
after taking a cinema picture of a leopard, I had passed 
through a herd of some hundred and fifty buffaloes that were 
grazing on a wide expanse of tarai grass through which ran a 
sandy nullah, with a trickle of water in it. In this nullah I had 
seen the fresh pug marks of a tiger and a tigress. From the 
violent booming of the bells it was evident that the herd of 
buffaloes was stampeding back to the cattle station, and 
mingled with the sound of the bells was the bellowing of a 
single buffalo. The men at the cattle station, some ten in 
number, had now taken alarm and started to shout and to beat 
tin cans, whereon the buffalo stopped bellowing but the herd 



continued to stampede until it reached the station. 

Shortly after all the noise had died down I heard two shots, and 
on going to the station to investigate I saw a young European 
with a gun in his hand and a ring of Indians standing round a 
buffalo that was stretched on the ground. The European told 
me that he was employed by the Indian Wood Products at 
Izatnagar and that he had been talking to the cattle men when 
they heard the distant booming of the buffalo bells. As the 
sound drew nearer they heard the bellowing of a buffalo and 
the angry roar of a tiger (I was farther away and so had not 
heard the tiger), and fearing that the tiger was coming to the 
station they had started shouting and beating tin cans. On the 
arrival of the herd one of the buffaloes was seen to be 
smothered in blood and on the cattle men saying that nothing 
could be done for it, he had asked for and obtained permission 
to shoot it and had put two bullets into its head to end its 
suffering. 

The buffalo the young man had shot was young and in perfect 
condition, and the cattle men were probably right when they 
informed me it was one of the best in the herd. I had never 
seen an animal in the condition it presented, so I examined it 
very thoroughly. 

On the buffalo's neck and throat there was not a single mark of 
tooth or claw, but on its back were fifty or more deep cuts 
made by a tiger's claws. Some of these claw marks had been 
made while the tiger was facing towards the buffalo's head, 
others had been made while it had been facing towards the 
buffalo's tail. While riding the maddened animal the tiger had 
torn off and eaten some five pounds of flesh from its withers, 
and some ten to fifteen pounds from its hind quarters. 

Going back to my camp I armed myself with a heavy rifle and 
went down the trail the buffaloes had made, and found that the 
stampede had started on the far side of the nullah in which I 
had seen the tiger's pug marks. But the grass here was 
unfortunately shoulder high, so I was not able to reconstruct 



the scene or to find any clue as to how the tiger came to be on 
the back of a buffalo it had no intention of killing, as was 
evident from the absence of marks on the buffalo's neck and 
throat. This failure to reconstruct the scene I greatly regret, for 
apart from its being the only occasion on which I have been at 
fault, I believe no other instance of a tiger riding an animal and 
having a meal while doing so has ever been known. 

The pug marks in the nullah showed that both tigers were full 
grown, so it was not a case of a young and inexperienced tiger 
trying its hand; and, further, no young tiger would have dared 
to approach a herd of buffaloes at ten o'clock in the morning, 
or, for the matter of that, at any hour. 

( 2 ) 

Evelyn Gill, son of my old friend Harry Gill, is one of the 
keenest butterfly collectors I know, and in a conversation I 
had with him while he was in Naini Tal on short leave 
I mentioned having seen on the Powalgarh road a butterfly with 
brilliant red spots on its upper wings. Evelyn said he had not 
seen a butterfly of this kind and he begged me to get him 
a specimen. 

Some months later I was camped at Sandni Gaga, three miles 
from Powalgarh, trying to get a cinema picture of cheetal stags 
fighting, for at that time it was not unusual to see several 
battles between rival stags taking place at the same time on 
the Sandni Gaga plain. One morning after an early breakfast I 
set out with my butterfly net to try to get the specimen I had 
promised Evelyn. A hundred yards from my tent there was a 
forest road connecting Kaladhungi with Powalgarh, and in a 
hollow a mile along this road where there was 
a sambhar wallow I hoped to get the butterfly. 

This forest road was little used by human beings and as there 
was an abundance of game in the forest through which it ran, 
an early morning walk along it was of great interest, for on the 
road, which was of hard clay with a light film of dust on it, was 



a record of all the animals that had used or crossed it during 
the night. When looking at tracks on a road or game path, with 
a trained eye, it is not necessary to stop at each track to 
determine the species, size, movement, and so on of the animal 
or animals that have made the track, for these details are 
subconsciously noted. For instance, the porcupine that had 
come out on to the road, a little beyond where I joined the road 
after leaving my camp, had evidently taken fright at something 
in the jungle on the right of the road and had scurried back. 

The reason for his fright was apparent a few yards farther on, 
where a bear had crossed the road from right to left. On 
entering the jungle on the left the bear had disturbed a 
sounder of pig and a small herd of cheetal, for they had dashed 
across the road into the jungle on the right. A little farther on, 
a sambhar stag had come out from the right and after browsing 
on a bush had walked along the road for fifty yards, rubbed his 
antlers against a young sapling, and then gone back into the 
jungle. Near this spot a four-horned antelope, with a fawn at 
foot, had come on the road. The fawn, whose hoof-prints were 
no bigger than the finger nails of a child, had skipped about the 
road until the mother had taken fright, and after dashing down 
the road for a few yards mother and fawn had gone into the 
jungle. Here there was a bend in the road, and at the bend 
were the footprints of a hyaena who had come as far as this, 
and then turned and gone back the way it had come. 

Reading the signs on the road and listening to the birds— 
Sandni Gaga in addition to being the most beautiful spot for a 
hundred miles round is noted for its bird life— I had covered 
half a mile when I came to a stretch of the road that had been 
cut out of the face of the hill. Here the surface was too hard to 
show normal tracks and I had gone a short distance along the 
road when my attention was arrested by an unusual mark. This 
was a little furrow three inches long and two inches deep 
where it started, and it was at right angles to the road. The 
furrow could have been made by a staff with an iron point, but 
no human being had been along the road for twenty-four hours 



and the furrow had been made within the past twelve hours. 
And again, if a human being had made it it would have been 
parallel with and not at right angles to the road, which at this 
point was fourteen feet wide with a more or less perpendicular 
bank some ten feet high on the right and a steep slope on the 
left. The earth thrown out of the furrow showed that the object 
that had made it had travelled from right to left. 

Having satisfied myself that the furrow had not been made by a 
human being, I came to the conclusion that the only other thing 
that could have made it was the pointed tip of a horn, either of 
a cheetal or of a youngsambhar. Had either of these deer 
jumped down the steep bank and made a bad landing, hard 
though the ground was the hoofs of the animal would have 
broken the surface and left a track, but there were no deer 
tracks anywhere near the furrow. The final conclusion that I 
arrived at, therefore— with the furrow as my only clue— was 
that it had been made by the horn of a dead deer, and made 
when a tiger had jumped down the bank with the deer in its 
mouth. That there were no drag marks on the road was not 
unusual, for whenever it is possible to do so both tigers and 
leopards when crossing a road with a kill lift the kill clear of 
the ground, and this I believe they do to avoid leaving a scent 
trail for bears, hyaenas, and jackals to follow. 

To test the accuracy of my deductions I crossed the road and 
looked down the hill on the left of the road. No drag marks 
were to be seen, but on a bush twenty feet down the hill and at 
a height of about four feet I saw something glistening on a leaf 
in the morning sun; on going down to investigate I found this 
was a big drop of blood, not yet quite dry. From here on, 
tracking was easy, and fifty yards farther down under the 
shelter of a small tree and surrounded by thick bushes I found 
the kill, a cheetal stag with horns that many a sportsman would 
have prized as a good trophy. The tiger was taking no chances 
of his kill— from which he had eaten both hind quarters- 
being found by bird or beast, for he had scratched together the 
dry leaves and twigs for a considerable distance round, and 



had heaped them on the kill. When a tiger does this it is an 
indication that he is not lying up nearby to keep an eye on the 
kill. 

I had been told by Fred Anderson and Huish Edye of a big tiger 
in this area which Mrs (now Lady) Anderson had christened the 
Bachelor of Powalgarh. I had long wished to see this famous 
tiger that all the sportsmen in the province were trying to bag, 
and which I knew lived in a deep ravine that started near 
the sambhar wallow I was making for. As there were no pug 
marks near the kill by which I could identify the tiger that had 
killed the cheetal, it occurred to me that it was just possible 
that the kill was the property of the Bachelor and, if so, that 
there was now a reasonable chance of my having a look at this 
tiger to see if he was as big as he was reputed to be. 

Starting from near the kill a narrow glade ran down to a small 
stream a hundred yards away. Beyond the stream was a 
dense patch of wild lime. If the Bachelor had not gone back to 
his ravine he would in all probability be lying up in this patch of 
cover, so I decided to try to get the tiger to return to his kill. 
Having come to this decision I went up towards the road and 
buried my white butterfly net under dead leaves. The glade at 
the upper end was about ten feet wide and the tree under 
which the kill was lying was about the same distance from the 
right-hand side of the glade. On the left-hand side, and nearly 
opposite the kill was the dead stump of a tree roofed over with 
creepers. First seeing that there were no holes in the dead 
stump to harbour snakes, I cleared away the dry leaves from 
the foot of the stump— to avoid sitting on scorpions— and then 
made myself comfortable with my back to the stump. From my 
seat I could see the kill, which was about thirty feet away, and I 
could also see down the glade to the stream, on the far side of 
which a troupe of red monkeys were feeding on the berries of 
a pipal tree. 

When my preparations were completed, I gave the call of a 
leopard. Leopards will— when it is safe for them to do so— eat 



a tiger's kill, and of this tigers are very resentful. If the tiger 
was within hearing distance, and if my imitation was 
sufficiently good to deceive him, I expected him to come up the 
glade, and after I had had a good look at him I intended letting 
him know I was there and then make my getaway The monkeys 
responded to my call by giving their alarm call, and three of 
them took up positions on a branch that jutted out from 
the pipal tree at right angles at a height of about forty feet 
above ground. The alarm call of the monkeys which, as they 
could not see me, only lasted for a minute or so was all to the 
good, for if the tiger was in the vicinity he would now be 
assured that a leopard was interfering with his kill. I kept my 
eye on the three monkeys, and presently I saw one of them turn 
round, peer into the jungle behind him, bob his head up and 
down several times, and then he gave an alarm call. A minute 
later the other two started calling and were followed by several 
others farther up the tree. The tiger was coming, and I greatly 
regretted not having my camera with me for he would make a 
grand picture, walking up the glade with the sun glinting on 
the water of the stream and the pipal tree with the excited 
monkeys on it in the background. 

As usually happens on these occasions, however, the tiger did 
not do what I expected. After a long pause, during which I had 
the uneasy feeling that the tiger was approaching his kill from 
behind me, I caught a fleeting glimpse of him as he sprang 
across the stream and disappeared into the thick jungle on the 
right-hand side of the glade. After reconnoitring the position 
from the bushes beyond the stream the tiger had evidently 
concluded that if he came up the glade the leopard would see 
him, so he had started out to stalk the kill where he evidently 
expected to find the leopard. As far as I was concerned there 
was no objection to his doing this, though it would mean his 
coming closer to me than I had intended letting him. 

The ground was carpeted with dry leaves, and the tiger 
accomplished his stalk without my hearing a sound. I next saw 
him as he was standing looking down at his kill but, to my great 



unease, I found I was not looking at the Bachelor, but at a big 
tigress. At the best of times a tigress's temper cannot be relied 
on, and this was not one of those 'best of times', for I was 
sitting too close to her kill for my comfort, and , further it was 
quite possible that she had cubs in the lime thicket, in which 
case she would resent my presence near her kill. However, if 
she went bark the way she had come all would be well, but the 
tigress did not do this. After satisfying herself that the leopard 
had not touched her kill, she walked out on to the glade, 
halving the distance between us. For a long minute she stood 
undecided, while I held my breath and closed my eyes until I 
was looking through a slit, and then she quietly walked down 
the glade, lay down at the stream, had a drink, and then sprang 
across the stream and disappeared into the thick cover. 

In both the incidents I have related in these stories I did not 
know, at the start, that a crime had been committed, and it is 
this uncertainty of not knowing what a small clue will lead up 
to that makes the compiling of jungle detective stories so 
interesting and so exciting. 

Few can compile a detective story of fiction, but all can compile 
jungle detective stories provided they have eyes to more than 
the road they walk on, and provided also that they do not start 
with the assumption that they know all, before in fact they 
know anything. 



Chapter Nine 

WHEN I WAS TEN YEARS of age I was considered old enough 
to join the school cadet company of the Naini Tal Volunteer 
Rifles. Volunteering was very popular and was taken very 
seriously in India in those days, and all able-bodied boys and 
men took pride and pleasure in joining the force. There were 
four cadet companies and one adult company in our battalion 
with a combined strength of 500 which, for a population of 
6,000, meant that every one in twelve was a volunteer. 

The Principal of our school of seventy boys was also captain of 
the school cadet company, which mustered fifty strong. The 
holder of these dual posts was an ex-army man and it was his 
burning, and very praiseworthy, ambition to have the best 
cadet company in the battalion and to satisfy this ambition we 
small boys suffered, and suffered greatly. Twice a week we 
drilled on the school playground, and once a week we drilled 
with the other four companies on the flats, an open stretch of 
ground at the upper end of the Naini Tal lake. 

Our captain never missed, nor did he ever overlook a fault, and 
all mistakes made on the drill grounds were atoned for after 
evening school. Taking up a position four feet from his target 
and wielding a four-foot-long cane, the captain was a 
marksman of repute who had earned for himself the tide of 
'Dead Eye Dick'. I do not know if he made private bets with 
himself, but we small boys laid wagers of marbles, tops, 
penknives, and even on occasions the biscuit that formed our 
breakfast, that nine times out of ten our captain could lay his 
cane along the most painful weal left on the hand by the 
previous day's or previous week's caning, and the boy— usually 
a newcomer— who betted against the odds always lost. The 
cadets of the other three companies hotly disputed our 
reputation of being the best drilled company but they did not 
dispute our claim of our being the best turned-out company. 
This claim was justified, for before being marched down to drill 
with the other companies we were subjected to an inspection 



that detected the minutest particle of dirt under a finger-nail, 
or speck of dust on the uniform. 

Our uniforms— passed down when grown out of— were of dark 
blue serge of a quality guaranteed to stand hard wear and to 
chafe every tender part of the skin they came in contact with, 
and, further, to show every speck of dust. Hot and uncommon 
as the uniform was it was surpassed in discomfort by the 
helmet that was worn with it. Made of some heavy compressed 
material, this instrument of torture was armed with a four-inch- 
long fluted metal spike, the threaded butt end of which 
projected down inside the helmet for an inch or more. To keep 
the threaded end from boring into the brain the inner band had 
to be lined with paper, and when the helmet had been fixed to 
the head like a vice it was held in that position by a heavy 
metal chin strap mounted on hard leather. After three hours in 
the hot sun few of us left the drill ground without a splitting 
headache which made repetition of lessons prepared the 
previous night difficult, with the result that the four-foot cane 
was used more freely on drill days than on any other. 

On one of our drill days on the flats the battalion was inspected 
by a visiting officer of senior rank. After an hour of musketry 
drill and marching and counter-marching, the battalion was 
marched up to the Suka Tal (dry lake) rifle range. Here the 
cadet companies were made to sit down on the hillside while 
the adult company demonstrated to the visiting officer their 
prowess with the 450 Martini rifle. The battalion prided itself 
on having some of the best rifle shots in India in its ranks, and 
this pride was reflected in every member of the force. The 
target, standing on a masonry platform, was made of heavy 
sheet-iron and the experts could tell from the ring of the bullet 
on the iron sheet ether it had struck the centre of the target or 
the edge of it. 

Each cadet company had its hero in the adult company, and 
adverse comments against the marksmanship of a selected 
hero would that morning have resulted in many sanguinary 



fights, had fighting in uniform not been frowned on. After the 
scores of the best shots had been announced, the cadets were 
ordered to fall in and march down from the five-hundred- to the 
two-hundred-yard range. Here four senior cadets were selected 
from each rompany and we juniors were ordered to pile arms 
and sit down behind the firing point. 

Inter-school competition in all forms of sport, and most of all on 
the rifle range, was very keen and every shot fired that 
morning by the four competing teams was eagerly watched and 
fiercely commented on by friend and foe alike. The scores ran 
close, for the best shots in each company had been selected by 
the respective company commanders, and there was great 
jubilation in our ranks when it was announced that our team 
had come out second in the competition and that we had been 
beaten by only one point by the school that had three times our 
membership. 

While we— the rank and file— were commenting on the 
achievements of the recent competitors, the Sergeant-Major 
was seen to detach himself from the group of officers and 
instructors standing at the firing point, and come towards us 
bellowing in a voice that it was claimed could be heard a mile 
away, 'Corbett, Cadet Corbett!' Heavens! What had I done now 
that merited punishment? True I had said that the last shot that 
had put the rival company one point ahead of us had been a 
fluke, and someone had offered to fight me, but there had been 
no fight for I did not even know who the challenger was, and 
here now was that awful Sergeant-Major again bellowing, 
'Corbett, Cadet Corbett!' 'Go on.' 'He's calling you.' ‘Hurry up 
or you'll catch it,' was being said on all sides of me; and at last, 
in a very weak voice, I answered 'Yes sir. 1 'Why didn't you 
answer? Where is your carbine? 

Fetch it at once,' were rapped out at me all in one breath. 

Dazed by these commands I stood undecided until a push from 
behind by a friendly hand and an urgent 'Go on you fool 1 set me 
off at a run for my carbine. 



On our arrival at the two-hundred-yard range those of us who 
were not competing had been made to pile arms, and my 
carbine had been used to lock one of the piles. In my effort now 
to release my carbine the whole pile of arms clattered to the 
ground and while I was trying to set the pile up again the 
Sergeant-Major yelled, 'Leave those carbines you have mucked 
up alone, and bring yours here. 1 'Shoulder arms, right turn, 
quick march' were the next orders I received. Feeling far worse 
than any lamb could possibly ever have felt I was led off to the 
firing point, the Sergeant-Major whispering over his shoulder 
as we started, 'Don't you dare disgrace me.' 

At the firing point the visiting officer asked if I was the 
youngest cadet in the battalion, and on being told that I was, 
he said he would like to see me fire a few rounds. The way in 
which this was said— and the kindly smile that went with it— 
gave me the feeling that of all the officers and instructors who 
were standing round, the visiting officer was the only one who 
realized how alone, and how nervous, a small boy suddenly 
called upon to perform before a large and imposing gathering 
can feel. 

The 450 Martini carbine the cadets were armed with had the 
most vicious kick of any small-arms weapon ever made, and the 
musketry course I had recendy been put through had left my 
shoulder— which was not padded with overmuch flesh— very 
tender and very painful, and the knowledge that it would now 
be subjected to further kicks added to my nervousness. 
However, I would have to go through with it now, and suffer for 
being the youngest cadet. So on the command of the Sergeant- 
Major I lay clown, picked up one of the five rounds that had 
been laid down for me, loaded the carbine and raising it very 
gently to my shoulder took what aim I could and pressed the 
trigger. No welcome ring came to my anxious ears from the 
iron target, only a dull thud, and then a quiet voice said, 'All 
right, Sergeant-Major, I will take over now,' and the visiting 
officer, in his spotless uniform, came and lay down beside me 
on the oily drugget. 'Let me have a look at your carbine,' he 



said, and when I passed it over to him a steady hand carefully 
adjusted the back-sight to two hundred yards, a detail I had 
omitted to attend to. The carbine was then handed hack to me 
with the injunction to take my time, and each of the following 
four shots brought a ring from the target. Patting me on the 
shoulder the visiting officer got to his feet and asked what 
score I had made and on being told that I had made ten, out of 
a possible twenty with the first shot a miss be said, 'Splendid. 
Very good shooting indeed, 1 and as he turned to speak to the 
officers and instructors I went back to my companions, walking 
on air. But my elation was short lived, for I was greeted with, 
'Rotten shot.' 'Disgraced the Company.' 'Could have done better 
with my eyes closed.' 'Crumbs, did you see that first shot, went 
and hit the hundred-yard firing point.' Boys are like that. They 
just speak their minds without any thought or intention of 
being cruel or unkind. 

The visiting officer who befriended me that day on the Suka Tal 
rifle range when I was feeling lonely and nervous, later became 
the nation's hero and ended his career as Field-Marshal Earl 
Roberts. When I have been tempted, as many times I have 
been, to hurry over a shot or over a decision, the memory of 
that quiet voice telling me to take my time has restrained me 
and I have never ceased being grateful to the great soldier who 
gave me that advice. 

The Sergeant-Major who for many years ruled the Naini Tal 
Volunteers with a rod of iron, was short and fat with a neck like 
a bull's and a heart of gold. After our last drill on the flats that 
term he asked me if I would like to have a rifle. Surprise and 
delight rendered me speechless; however, no reply appeared to 
be expected, and he went on to say, 'Come and see me before 
you leave for the holidays and I will give you a service rifle and 
all the ammunition you want, provided you promise to keep the 
rifle clean, and to return me the empties.' 

So that winter I went down to Kaladhungi armed with a rifle, 
and without any anxiety about ammunition. The rifle the good 



Sergeant-Major had selected for me was dead accurate, and 
though a 450 rifle firing a heavy bullet may not have been the 
best type of weapon for a boy to train on, it served my purpose. 
The bow and arrow had enabled me to penetrate farther into 
the jungles than the catapult, and the muzzle-loader had 
enabled me to penetrate farther than the bow and arrow; and 
now, armed with a rifle, the jungles were open to me to wander 
in wherever I chose to go. 

Fear stimulates the senses of animals, keeps them 'on their 
toes', and adds zest to the joy of life; fear can do the same for 
human beings. Fear had taught me to move noiselessly, to 
climb trees, to pin-point sound; and now, in order to penetrate 
into the deepest recesses of the jungle and enjoy the best in 
nature, it was essential to learn how to use my eyes, and how 
to use my rifle. 

A human being has a field of vision of 180 degrees, and when in 
a jungle in which all forms of life are to be met with, including 
poisonous snakes and animals that have been wounded by 
others, it is necessary to train the eyes to cover the entire field 
ol vision. Movements straight in front are easy to detect and 
easy to deal with, but movements at the edge of the field of 
vision are vague and indistinct and it is these vague and 
indistinct movements that can be most dangerous, and are 
most to be feared. Nothing in the jungle is deliberately 
aggressive, but circumstances may arise to make some 
creature so, and it is against the possibility of these chance 
happenings that the eye must be trained. On one occasion the 
darting in and out of the forked tongue of a cobra in a hollow 
tree, and on another occasion the moving of the tip of the tail 
of a wounded leopard lying behind a bush, warned me just in 
time that the cobra was on the point of striking and the leopard 
on the point of springing. On both these occasions I had been 
looking straight in front, and the movements had taken place at 
the extreme edge of my field of vision. 

The muzzle-loader had taught me to economize ammunition 



and now, when I had a rifle, I considered it wasteful to practise 
on a fixed target, so I practised on jungle-fowl and on peafowl, 
and I can recall only one instance of having spoilt a bird for the 
table. I never grudged the time spent, or the trouble taken, in 
stalking a bird and getting a shot, and when I attained 
sufficient accuracy with the rifle to place the heavy 450 bullet 
exactly where I wanted to, I gained confidence to hunt in those 
areas of the jungle into which I previously been too frightened 
to go. 

One of these areas, known to the family as the Farm Yard, was 
a dense patch of tree and scrub jungle several miles in extent, 
and reputed to be 'crawling' with jungle-fowl and tigers. 
Crawling was not an overstatement as far as the jungle-fowl 
were concerned, for nowhere have I seen these birds in greater 
numbers than in those days in the Farm Yard. The Kota- 
Kaladhungi road runs for a part of its length through the Farm 
Yard and it was on this road that the old dak runner, some 
years later, told mr he had seen the pug marks of the 'Bachelor 
of Powalgarh'. 

I had skirted round the Farm Yard in the bow-and-arrow and 
muzzle-loader days, but it was not until I was armed with the 
450 that I was able to muster sufficient courage to explore this 
dense tree and scrub jungle. Through the jungle ran a deep and 
narrow ravine, and up this ravine I was going one evening 
intent on shooting a bird for the pot, or a pig for our villagers, 
when I heard jungle-fowl scratching among the dead leaves in 
the jungle to my right. Climbing on to a rock in the ravine I sat 
down, and on cautiously raising my head above the bank saw 
some twenty to thirty jungle-fowl feeding towards me, led by an 
old cock in full plumage. Selecting the cock for my target, I was 
waiting with finger on trigger for his head to come in line with 
a tree— I never fired at a bird until I had a solid background 
for the bullet to go into— when I heard a heavy animal on the 
left of the ravine and on turning my head I saw a big leopard 
bounding down the hill straight towards me. The Kota road 
here ran across the hill, two hundred yards above me, and 



quite evidently the leopard had taken fright at something on 
the road and was now making for shelter as fast as he could go. 
The jungle-fowl had also seen the leopard and as they rose with 
a great flutter of wings, I slewed round on the rock to face the 
leopard. Failing in the general confusion to see my movement 
the leopard came straight on, pulling up when he arrived at the 
very edge of the ravine. 

The ravine here was about fifteen feet wide with steep banks 
twelve feet high on the left, and eight feet high on the right. 
Near the right bank, and two feet lower than it, was the rock 
on which I was sitting; the leopard was, therefore, a little 
above, and the width of the ravine from me. When he pulled up 
at the edge of the ravine he turned his head to look back the 
way he had come, thus giving me an opportunity of raising the 
rifle to my shoulder without the movement being seen by him. 
Taking careful aim at his chest I pressed the trigger just as 
he was turning his head to look in my direction. A cloud of 
smoke from the black-powder cartridge obscured my view and I 
only caught a fleeting glimpse of the leopard as he passed over 
my head and landed on the bank behind me, leaving splashes of 
blood on the rock on which I was sitting, and on my clothes. 

With perfect confidence in the rifle, and in my ability to put a 
bullet exactly where I wanted to, I had counted on killing the 
leopard outright and was gready disconcerted now to find that 
I had only wounded him. That the leopard was badly wounded I 
could see from the blood, but I lacked the experience to know— 
from the position of the wound, and the blood— whether the 
wound was likely to prove fatal or not. Fearing that if I did not 
follow him immediately he might get away into some 
inaccessible cave or thicket where it would be impossible for 
me to find him, I reloaded the rifle and stepping from my rock 
on to the bank, set off to follow the blood trail. 

For a hundred yards the ground was flat, with a few scattered 
trees and bushes, and beyond this it fell steeply away for fifty 
yards before again flattening out. On this steep hillside there 



were many bushes and big rocks, behind any one of which the 
leopard might have been sheltering. Moving with the utmost 
caution, and scanning every foot of ground, I had gone half-way 
down the hillside when from behind a rock, some twenty yards 
away, I saw the leopard's tail and one hind leg projecting. Not 
knowing whether the leopard was alive or dead I stood stock 
still until presently the leg was withdrawn, leaving only the tail 
visible. The leopard was alive and to get a shot at him I would 
have to move either to the right or to the left. Having already 
hit the leopard in the body, and not killed him, I now decided to 
try his head, so inch by inch I crept to the left until his head 
came into view. He was lying with his back to the rock, looking 
away from me. I had not made a sound but the leopard 
appeared to sense that I was near, and as he was turning his 
head to look at me I put a bullet into his ear. The range was 
short, and I had taken my time, and I knew now that the 
leopard was dead, so going up to him I caught him by the tail 
and pulled him away from the blood in which he was lying. 

It is not possible for me to describe my feelings as I stood 
looking down at my first leopard. My hands had been steady 
from the moment I first saw him bounding down the steep 
hillside and until I pulled him aside to prevent the blood from 
staining his skin. But now, not only my hands but my whole 
body was trembling: trembling with fear at the thought of what 
would have happened if, instead of landing on the bank behind 
me, the leopard had landed on my head. Trembling with joy at 
the beautiful animal I had shot, and trembling most of all with 
anticipation of the pleasure I would have in carrying the news 
of my great success to those at home who I knew would be as 
pleased and as proud of my achievement as I was. I could have 
screamed, shouted, danced, and sung, all at one and the same 
time. But I did none of these things, I only stood and trembled, 
for my feelings were too intense to be given expression in the 
jungle, and could only be relieved by being shared with others. 

I had no idea how heavy a leopard was, but I was determined to 
carry rmy leopard home; so, laying the rifle down, I ran back to 



the ravine where there was a bauhinia creeper, and stripping 
off sufficient of the inner bark to make a strong rope, I 
returned and tied the fore and the hind legs of the leopard 
together. Then squatting down I got the legs across my 
shoulders but found I could not stand up, so I dragged the 
leopard on to the rock and again tried and found I could not lift 
it. Realizing that the leopard would have to be left, I hastily 
broke some branches and, covering it up, set off on my three- 
mile run for home. There was great excitement and great 
rejoicing in the home when I arrived with the news that I had 
shot a leopard, and within a few minutes Maggie and I, 
accompanied by two hefty servants, were on our way to the 
Farm Yard to bring home my first leopard. 

It is fortunate that Providence does not exact retribution for 
the mistakes of beginners or my first encounter with a leopard 
would probably have been my last, for I made the mistake of 
shooting at that first leopard when it was above and within 
springing distance of me, without knowing where to hit it to kill 
it outright. My total bag of animals up to that date was 
one cheetal— shot with the muzzle-loader— and three pigs and 
onekakar, shot with the 450 rifle. The pigs and the kakar I 
killed stone dead, and I thought I could also kill the leopard 
stone dead by shooting it in the chest, and there I made my 
mistake. For I learnt subsequenUy that though a leopard can 
be killed stone dead, it is seldom possible to do this by shooting 
it in the chest. 

When a leopard receives a body wound that does not kill it 
outright or disable it, it springs wildly, and though leopards 
never attack deliberately immediately on being shot at, there 
is always a risk of their making accidental contact with the 
sportsman, especially when they are above and within 
springing distance, and this risk is increased when the 
wounded animal is not aware of the position of its assailant. 
That the leopard in his wild spring landed on the bank behind 
me and not on my head was my good fortune, for not knowing 
where I was he might have made accidental contact with me. 



which would have been just as unpleasant as a deliberate 
attack. 

As an example of how uncertain a chest shot is, I will relate 
another experience I had with a leopard I shot in the chest. 
Maggie and I were camped one winter at Mangolia Khatta, a 
cattle station to which the animals of our village were sent 
when grazing in the Kaladhungi jungles became scarce. One 
morning while we were having breakfast the barking of a herd 
of cheetal apprised me of the fact that one of their number had 
been killed by a leopard. I had gone to Mangolia Khatta to try 
to shoot a leopard that was taking toll of our cows, and as there 
appeared to be a chance of getting a shot at the leopard now, I 
left Maggie to finish her breakfast and, picking up a 275 rifle, 
set off to investigate. 

The deer were calling four hundred yards due west of us, but to 
get to them I had to make a detour to avoid an impenetrable 
canebrake and swampy ground. Approaching the calling 
animals from the south, with the wind in my face, I saw some 
fifty stags and hinds standing on an open patch of burnt ground 
and looking in the direction of the canebrake. On the 
swampy ground between the canebrake and the open ground 
there was a belt of grass some two hundred yards wide, and 
from the open ground, and at a distance of sixty yards from me, 
a leopard was attempting to drag a cheetal stag towards this 
belt of grass. It was not possible to approach any nearer to the 
leopard without being seen by the herd of cheetal, who would 
have warned the leopard of my presence, so I sat down and 
raising my rifle waited for the leopard to give me a shot. 

The stag was big and heavy and the leopard was having great 
difficulty in dragging it over the rough ground, and presently it 
released its hold and stood up facing me A leopard's white 
chest, flecked with black, is a perfect target for an accurate 
rifle at sixty yards, and when I pressed the trigger I knew I had 
put the bullet where I wanted to. On receiving my shot the 
leopard sprang high into the air, and landing on all fours. 



dashed into the belt of grass. Going to the spot where the 
leopard had been standing I saw a blood trail leading to the 
grass, which here was about waist-high. Breaking some 
branches off a nearby tree, I covered up the stag to prevent 
vultures getting at it, for the stag was in velvet and in prime 
condition and I knew our men would be glad to have it. 
Returning to camp I finished my breakfast and then, 
accompanied by four of our tenants, went back to recover the 
stag and to follow up the wounded leopard. As we approached 
the spot from where I had fired, one of the men touched me on 
the shoulder and pointed to our right front, where the burnt 
ground ended and the belt of grass began. After a little while I 
saw what he was pointing at. It was a leopard, two hundred 
and fifty yards away, standing near the edge of the belt of 
grass. 

Our tenants, when in camp with us stoutly refuse to accept any 
payment for their services, but when out in the jungles we 
compete among ourselves to see who will be the first to spot a 
shootable animal, and when Ilose they accept with great glee 
the rupee I pay as forfeit. When I had paid my forfeit to the two 
men who claimed to have seen the leopard at the same time, I 
told them to sit down for the leopard had now turned and was 
coming in our direction.Quite evidently this was the mate of the 
one I had wounded and, attracted to the spot as I had been, 
was coming to see what its mate had killed. A hundred yards 
from us a tongue of grass extended for a few yards on to the 
open ground, and on reaching this spot— from where the 
leopard could see the kill— it stopped for several minutes, 
offering me a shot at its chest, but as I already had one leopard 
with a chest wound on my hands I held my fire. 

The leopard was very suspicious of the branches I had heaped 
on the kill; however, after a careful look all round, it cautiously 
approached the kill and as it stood broadside on to me I put a 
bullet into it an inch or two behind the left shoulder. It fell at 
my shot and did not move again and on going up to it I found it 
was dead. Telling the men to tie it to the bamboo pole they had 



brought and carry it to camp and return for the stag, I set out 
on the very unpleasant task of following up a wounded leopard 
in waist-high grass. 

The unwritten law that a wounded animal must be recovered at 
all costs is accepted by all sportsmen and— where carnivora 
are concerned— each individual has his own method of 
accomplishing this end. Those who have the command of 
elephants find the task an easy one, but those like myself who 
shoot on foot have to learn by experience the best method of 
putting wounded carnivora out of their suffering, and avoiding 
injury while doing so. Burning a jungle to recover a wounded 
animal is, in my opinion, both cruel and wasteful, for if the 
animal is able to move the chances are that it will get away to 
die, maybe days or weeks later, and if it is too badly wounded 
to move there is a certainty of its being roasted alive. 

It is not possible to follow the blood trail of carnivora in high 
grass with any degree of safety, and the method I adopted on 
the occasions on which I retrieved wounded carnivora in 
grass was to ignore the blood trail and to proceed inch by inch 
in the direction in which theanimal had gone, hoping for the 
best while prepared for the worst. On hearing the slightest 
sound a wounded animal will either charge or betray its 
position by some movement. If a charge does not materialize 
and the looked-for movement is observed, a stone or a billet of 
wood, or even a hat, can be usefully used and the animal dealt 
with when it charges at the thrown object. This method can 
only be adopted when there is no wind to rustle the grass, and 
when the sportsman has had some experience of shooting in 
grass, for though wounded carnivora are very vocal when 
disturbed they keep close to the ground and seldom show 
themselves until the last moment. 

There was no wind of any account that day at Mangolia Khatta, 
and after leaving my men I followed the blood trail over the 
burnt ground to where it entered the grass. Satisfying myself 
that my rifle was loaded and that it was working smoothly I 



stepped very cautiously into the grass, and as I did so I heard a 
whistle behind me and on looking round saw my men 
beckoning to me. On my rejoining them they pointed to three 
bullet holes they had found in the dead leopard while tying it to 
the bamboo pole. One was the bullet hole behind the left 
shoulder that had killed the leopard; of the other two, one was 
in the centre of the chest, while the other— an exit hole— was 
two inches from the root of the tail. 

The leopard, I very greatly regret to say, had a reason for 
returning to its kill, and when I found what this reason was I 
consumed with remorse. Leopard cubs can fend for themselves 
at a very young age by catching small birds, rats, mice, and 
frogs, and I can only hope that the cubs of the gallant mother, 
who after being wounded, risked her life to procure food for 
her young, were old enough to fend for themselves, for all my 
efforts to find them failed. 

My statement that before entering the grass to follow up the 
wounded leopard, I satisfied myself that my rifle was loaded 
and working smoothly, will appear unusual to sportsmen in 
view of the fact that I had a minute previously walked up to a 
leopard I had just shot, and presumably I had not done so with 
an empty rifle without knowing whether the leopard was alive 
or dead. What necessity then was there for me to satisfy myself 
that my rifle was loaded? I will tell why I did so, not only on 
this occasion but on every occasion on which my life has 
depended on my rifle being loaded. Fortunately I learnt my 
lesson when I was comparatively young, and to this I attribute 
the fact that I have lived to tell the tale. 

Shortly after starting work at Mokameh Ghat, of which I told 
in My India, I invited two friends to shoot with me at 
Kaladhungi. Both men. Silver and Mann, had recently arrived 
in India and had never fired a shot in the jungles. The morning 
after their arrival I took them out, and two miles along the 
Haldwani road I heard a leopard killing a cheetal in the jungle 
to the right of the road. Knowing it would not be possible for 



my friends to stalk the leopard, I decided to put one of them up 
on a tree over the kill, and told them to draw lots. Silver was 
armed with a ?500 D.B. rifle which he had borrowed, while 
Mann was armed with a 400 S.B. black-powder rifle, also 
borrowed. I was armed with a .275 magazine rifle. As Silver 
was a little older, and better armed than Mann, Mann very 
sportingly declined to draw, and the three of us set off to find 
the kill. The cheetal, a fine stag, was still twitching when we 
found it, and selecting a tree for Silver to sit on I left Mann to 
help him up, while I moved the leopard away to prevent it 
seeing Silver climbing the tree. The leopard was very hungry 
and disinclined to move; however, by zigzagging in front of him 
I drove him away and then returned to the kill. Silver had never 
before climbed a tree and was looking very unhappy, and I am 
not sure that I cheered him by remarking that the leopard was 
a big male, and cautioning him to be very careful over his shot. 
Then telling him that he would only have to wait a matter of 
five minutes, I took Mann away. 

A hundred yards from the kill there was a fire track that met 
the Haldwani road at right angles. Going through the jungles to 
this track, Mann and I had only proceeded a short distance 
along it when Silver fired two shots in quick succession, and as 
we turned round to retrace our steps we saw the leopard 
dashing across the track. Silver did not know whether he had 
hit the leopard or not, but on going to the spot where Mann 
and I had seen it crossing the track we found a blood trail. 
Telling my companions to sit on the track and wait for me, I set 
off alone to deal with the leopard. There was nothing heroic in 
this, quite the contrary in fact, for when following wounded 
carnivore it is necessary to concentrate attention on the matter 
in hand and it is difficult to do this when accompanied by 
companions with fingers on the triggers of cocked rifles. When 
I had gone a short distance Silver came after me and offered to 
accompany me, and when I declined his offer he begged me to 
take his rifle, saying he would never forgive himself if the 
leopard attacked me and I was unable to defend myself with my 



light rifle. So, to please him, we exchanged rifles. As Silver 
walked back to the fire track I set off for the second time, but 
before doing so I uncocked his rifle and opened the breach 
sufficiently to see that there were two cartridges in the 
chambers. 

The ground for a hundred yards was comparatively open, and 
then the blood trail led into heavy cover. As I approached this 
cover I heard the leopard moving in front of me, and for a 
second I thought it was on the point of charging. The sound 
was not repeated, however, so very cautiously I entered the 
cover and twenty yards farther on found where the leopard had 
been lying, and from where he had got up when I heard him. It 
was now a case of moving step by step and I was thankful, 
when a hundred and fifty yards farther on, the trail led out on 
to more open ground. There I was able to move faster and I had 
covered another hundred yards when, on approaching a 
big haldu tree, I caught sight of the tip of the leopard's tail 
projecting from the right-hand side of the tree. Finding he was 
followed the leopard had quite evidently taken up what he 
considered would be the best position for his charge, and that 
he would charge I had no doubt whatever. 

Deciding it would be to my advantage to meet a head-on 
charge, I moved to the left of the tree. As the leopard's head 
came into view I saw he was lying flat down, facing me, with 
his chin resting on his outstretched paws. His eyes were open, 
and the tips of his ears and his whiskers were trembling. The 
leopard should have sprung at me the moment I appeared 
round the tree, and that he had not done so made me hold my 
fire, for it had not been my intention to blow his head off at a 
range of a few feet, but to put a bullet into his body and 
so avoid ruining Silver's trophy. As I continued to stare at him 
his eyes closed and I realized that he was dead, that in fact he 
had died as I was watching him. To make sure I was right I 
coughed and as there was no response, I picked up a stone and 
hit him on the head. 



Silver and Mann came up at my call and before handing 
Silver's rifle back to him I opened the breach and extracted the 
two brass cartridges, and, to my horror, found that both were 
empty Many sportsmen have suffered through pulling the 
triggers of empty rifles, and had I not been slowed down while 
following the blood trail through heavy cover, I would have 
added to the number. From the day I learnt my lesson, 
fortunately without injury to myself, I have never approached 
dangerous ground without satisfying myself that the weapon I 
am carrying is loaded. If I am carrying a double-barrelled rifle I 
change the cartridges from one chamber to the other, and if I 
am carrying a single-barrelled rifle I eject the cartridge, see 
that the bolt is working smoothly, and then replace the 
cartridge in the chamber. 



Chapter Ten 

KUNWAR SINGH, OF WHOM I wrote in My India, had a great 
aversion to shooting in the jungles near Kaladhungi, which he 
said were full of ground creepers which made it difficult to run 
away from zealous forest guards and angry tigers, and for this 
reason he confined all his poaching activities to the Garuppu 
jungles. Good woodsman and good shot though he was, and 
greatly as I admired him, Kunwar Singh was not a super¬ 
sportsman and this I attribute to the fact that the jungles in 
which he did his shooting were teeming with game. Knowing 
every game-path and every glade and open stretch of ground 
on which deer were to be found, his method of approach was to 
stride through the jungles without any attempt at silence, and 
If he disturbed the deer in one glade he would say it did not 
matter for there were sure to be more in the next glade. 
Nevertheless I learnt many things from Kunwar Singh for 
which I have never ceased to be grateful, and I am also grateful 
to him for having helped me to overcome some of my fears of 
the unknown. One of these fears concerned forest fires. Having 
heard of the danger of forest fires and seen the effect of them 
in our jungles, I carried the fear in the back of my mind that I 
would one day be caught by a forest fire and roasted alive, and 
it was Kunwar Singh who dispelled this fear. 

In village areas in the Kumaon foothills every one is interested 
in his neighbour's affairs or doings, and to people who never 
see a daily paper and whose lives are, more or less, 
circumscribed by the forest that surrounds their village or 
group of villages, every scrap of news is of interest and is 
eagerly passed on, losing nothing in repetition. It was not 
surprising, therefore, for Kunwar Singh to have heard about my 
shooting of the leopard in the Farm Yard almost before the 
animal had time to cool, and being the sportsman he was he 
lost no time in coming to congratulate me. He knew about the 
rifle the Sergeant-Major had lent me, but until I shot the 
leopard I do not think he had any faith in my ability to use it. 
Now, however, with this concrete evidence before him he 



evinced a great interest in me and in the rifle, and before he 
left me that day I had promised to meet him at 5 o'clock on the 
following morning at the fourth milestone on the Garuppu road. 

It was pitch dark when Maggie brewed a cup of tea for me, and 
with an hour in hand I set off to keep my appointment with 
Kunwar Singh. I had walked that lonely forest road on many 
occasions and the dark held no terror for me, and as I 
approached the fourth milestone I saw the glimmer of a fire 
under a tree by the side of the road. Kunwar Singh had arrived 
before me and as I sat down near his fire to warm my hands he 
said, 'Oh look, you have come away in such a hurry that you 
have forgotten to put on your trousers.' I tried, with little 
success, to convince Kunwar Singh that I had not forgotten to 
don my trousers but that I was wearing— for the first time— a 
new style of nether garment called shorts. For though he 
confined himself to saying that jangias (panties) were not 
suitable for the jungles, his look implied that I was indecently 
clothed and that he would be hanged if he would be seen with 
me in public. After this bad start the atmosphere did not clear 
until a jungle-cock started crowing in a near-by tree, on 
hearing which Kunwar Singh got to his feet, put out the fire, 
and said it was time to be going for we still had a long way to 
go. 

The jungle was awakening as we left our tree and stepped out 
on the road. The jungle-cock who, awakened by our fire, 
had crowed his welcome to the coming day had set a sound 
wave in motion and each bird, big and small, as it roused from 
slumber added its voice to the growing volume of sound. 
Though our jungle-cock is the first bird to rub the sleep from 
his eyes, he is not the first to descend to the ground. The 
privilege of catching the early worm is claimed by the 
Himalayan whistling-thrush, better known as the whistling- 
schoolboy. While walking through the Kumaon jungles in the 
half-light between day and night, or night and day, a bird will 
flit by on silent wings pouring out a stream of golden song 
which once heard will never be forgotten. The songster is the 



whistling schoolboy bidding the closing day good night, or 
welcoming the new-born day Morning and evening he pours 
out his song while in flight, and during the day he sits for hours 
in a leafy tree whistling in a soft sweet minor key a song that 
has no beginning and no end. Next to greet the coming light is 
the racket-tailed drongo and a minute later he is followed by 
the peafowl. No one may sleep after the peafowl has given his 
piercing call from the topmost branch of the giant samal tree 
and now, as night dies and daylight comes, a thousand 
throbbing throats in nature's orchestra fill the jungle with an 
ever-growing volume of melody. 

And not only the birds, but the animals also, are on the move. A 
small herd of cheetal has crossed the road in front of us, and 
two hundred yards farther on a sambhar hind and her young 
one are cropping the short grass by the side of the road. A tiger 
now calls to the east and all the peafowl within hearing 
distance scream in unison. Kunwar Singh is of opinion that the 
tiger is the flight of four bullets from us, and that it is in the 
sandy nullah in which he and Har Singh met with their 
experience which so nearly had a fatal ending. The tiger quite 
evidently is returning home from a kill and is indifferent as to 
who sees him. First a kakar, then twosambhar, and now a herd 
of cheetal are warning the jungle folk of his presence. We reach 
Garuppu as the sun is touching the treetops, and crossing the 
wooden bridge and disturbing fifty or more jungle-fowl that are 
feeding on the open ground near the ruined staging buildings 
we take a footpath which leads us through a narrow belt of 
scrub jungle to the bed of the dry watercourse spanned by the 
bridge we have just crossed. This watercourse, which is dry 
except in the heavy monsoon rains, is a highway for all the 
animals that quench their thirst at the crystal clear spring 
which rises in its bed three miles farther down. In later years 
the watercourse became one of my favourite hunting grounds 
for rifle and camera, for it ran through country which 
abounded with game, and a human track on its sandy bed was 
as much a matter for speculation as Friday's footprint on 



Crusoe's island. 


For half a mile the watercourse runs through scrub jungle 
before entering a strip of nal grass a quarter of a mile wide and 
many miles long. Nal grass is hollow, jointed like bamboo, 
grows to a height of fourteen feet, and when accessible to 
villages is extensively used for hut building. When the jungles 
round Garuppu are burnt by our villagers, to get grazing for 
their cattle, all the game in the vicinity take shelter in 
the nal grass which, because it grows on damp ground, 
remains green all the year round. During exceptionally dry 
years, however, the nal grass occasionally catches fire, and 
when this happens a terrifying conflagration results, for the 
grass is matted together with creepers and each joint of 
the nal, as it heats up bursts with a report resembling a pistol 
shot, and when millions of joints are exploding at the same time 
the resulting noise is deafening and can be heard for a mile or 
more. 

As Kunwar Singh and I walked down the watercourse that 
morning I could see a black cloud of smoke rising high into the 
sky, and presently the distant roar and crackle of a great fire 
came to my ears. The watercourse here ran due south and the 
fire, whuh was on the eastern or left bank, was being driven 
towards it by a strong wind. Kunwar Singh was leading and, 
remarking over his shoulder that the nal was burning for the 
first time in ten years, he kept straight on, and on turning a 
corner we came in sight of the fire, which was about a hundred 
yards from the watercourse. Great sheets of flame were curling 
up into the cloud of black smoke on the edge of which 
hundreds of starlings, minas, rollers, and drongos were feeding 
on the winged insects that were being caught up by the hot 
current of air and whirled high into the sky. Many of the insects 
that escaped capture by the birds in the air were landing on 
the sandy bed of the watercourse where they were being 
pounced on by peafowl, jungle-fowl, and black partridge. 

Among these game-birds a herd of some twenty cheetal were 
picking up the big red fleshy flowers the high wind was 



dislodging from a giant samal tree. 

This was the first forest fire I had ever seen, and I attribute the 
fear it engendered in me to the fact that most human beings 
are frightened of the unknown. And then, on rounding the 
corner and coming in sight of the birds and the animals that 
were unconcernedly feeding in the vicinity of the fire, I realized 
that I alone was terrified and that there was no reason, other 
than ignorance, for my being so. Coming down the watercourse 
in the wake of Kunwar Singh I had been tempted to turn and 
run away, and had only been restrained from doing so by the 
fear of being thought a coward by Kunwar Singh. Now, 
standing on the sandy bed of the fifty-yard-wide watercourse 
with the roar of the approaching fire growing louder and 
louder while black clouds of smoke billowed overhead- 
waiting for a shootable animal to be driven out of the 
narrowing belt of nal grass— my terror left me, never to return. 
The heat from the fire could now be felt in the watercourse, 
and as the deer, peafowl, jungle-fowl, and black partridge 
climbed the right bank and disappeared into the jungle, we 
turned and retraced our steps to Garuppu and made for home. 

In later years grass-fires provided me with many exciting 
experiences. Before relating one of these it is necessary for me 
to state that we who cultivate land at the foot of the Himalayas 
are permitted, by Government, to burn the grass in 
unprotected forests to get grazing for our cattle. There are 
several varieties of grass in these forests and as they do not all 
dry off at the same time the burning is staggered and, starting 
in February, ends in June. Throughout this period fires can be 
seen on the grasslands and anyone passing a patch of grass 
that he considers is dry enough to burn, is at liberty to put a 
match to it. 

I had been shooting black partridge with Wyndham at 
Bindukhera in the Tarai, and early one morning Bahadur— an 
old friend who for thirty years has been headman of our village 
— and I set out on our twenty-five-mile walk to our home at 



Kaladhungi. We had covered about ten miles over ground on 
which most of the grass had been burnt but where there were 
still a few isolated patches of unburnt grass when, as we 
approached one of these patches, an animal came out on the 
cart track we were on, and for a long minute stood broadside 
on to us. The morning sun was shining on it and from its 
colouring and size we look it to be a tiger. When, however, it 
crossed the cart track and entered the grass we saw from the 
length of its tail that it was a leopard. 'Sahib, 1 said Bahadur 
regretfully, 'it is a pity that the Commissioner Sahib and his 
elephants are ten miles away, for that is the biggest leopard in 
the Tarai, and it is worth shooting. 1 That the leopard was worth 
shooting there was no question, and even though Wyndham 
and his elephants were ten miles away, I decided to have a try, 
for the leopard had come from the direction of a cattle station, 
and the fact that he was moving about in the open at that hour 
of the day was proof that he was coming from a kill he had 
made overnight at this station. When I outlined my plan— to 
burn the leopard out— to Bahadur, he experssed his willingness 
to help, but was doubtful of its success. The first thing to do 
was to find out how big the patch of grass was, so leaving the 
cart track we circled round it and found it was some ten acres 
in extent and cone shaped, with the cart track running along 
the base. 

The wind was right for my plan, so going to the farthest point 
of the grass, which was about two hundred yards from the cart 
track, I cut two tufts of grass and lighting them sent Bahadur 
to set fire to the grass on the right, while I set fire to it on the 
left. It was of the variety known as elephant grass, some twelve 
feet in height, and as dry as tinder, and within a minute of our 
setting it alight it was burning fiercely. Running back to the 
cart track I lay down on it and putting my rifle, a .275 Rigby, to 
my shoulder I took a sight along the outer edge of the track at 
a height that would put my bullet in the leopard's body when 
he tried to dash across it. I was lying ten yards from the grass, 
and the point where the leopard had entered it was fifty yards 



from me. The track was ten feet wide and my only hope of 
hitting the leopard was to press the trigger the moment I 
caught sight of him, for I was convinced he would cross the 
track at the last moment, and cross it at speed. There was no 
possibility of injury to Bahadur for I had instructed him to 
climb a tree, well clear of the track, after he had set a short 
stretch of the grass on fire. 

Half the grass had been burnt and the roar from the fire was 
like an express train going over a trestle bridge, when I saw a 
bare human foot near my right shoulder. On looking up I found 
a man standing near me who, from his appearance and dress, I 
knew was I Mahommedan cartman probably out looking for a 
lost bullock. Reaching up I pulled the man down and yelled into 
his ear to lie still beside me, and to ensure his doing so I threw 
a leg across him. On came the fire and when only some twenty- 
five yards of grass remained to be burnt the leopard streaked 
across the track and as I pressed the trigger I saw its tail go 
up. The grass on the left-hand side of the track had been burnt 
some days previously, and the forest of burnt stalks into which 
the leopard had disappeared made it impossible for me to see 
what the result of my shot had been. Reassured, however, by 
the way the leopard's tail had gone up that he was fatally 
wounded, I sprang up, took a firm grip of the man's hand, 
jerked him to his feet, and ran with him down the cart track 
through a dense cloud of smoke with the flames of the 
oncoming fire curling dangerously over our heads. Not until we 
were right over him did we see the leopard, and without losing 
a moment— for the heat here was terrific— I stooped down and 
putting the man's hand on the leopard's tail closed my hand 
over his and as we pulled the leopard round to drag it away 
from the fire the animal, to my horror, opened its mouth and 
snarled at us. Fortunately for us my bullet had gone through its 
neck and paralysed it, and by the time we had dragged it fifty 
yards to safety it was dead. As I released my hold on the man's 
hand he sprang away from me as though I had bitten him, and 
grabbing the pugree off his head ran with it trailing behind him 



as no cartman had ever run before. 


I regret I was not present when my friend arrived at whatever 
destination he was making for. Indians are past masters at 
recounting tales, and my friend's tale of his escape from the 
clutches of a mad Englishman would have been worth listening 
to. Bahadur had witnessed the whole occurrence from his 
perch on the tree and when he rejoined me he said. That man 
will be very popular at camp-fires for many years to come, but 
no one will believe his story. 1 

When conditions are not favourable for walking up so-called 
dangerous animals and shooting them on foot, the method most 
generally employed is to beat them out of cover with the help 
of elephants or men, or a combination of the two. Three of 
these beats stand out in my memory as being worthy of record, 
if for no other reason than that two were carried out with the 
minimum of manpower, while the third provided me with an 
experience that makes my heart miss a beat or two every time I 
think of it. 

First Beat 

Robin— our springer spaniel— and I were out for a walk one 
morning on the fire track half a mile to the west of the Boar 
bridge. Robin was leading, and on coming to a spot where 
there was short grass on the little-used track he stopped, smelt 
the grass, and then turned his head and looked at me. On going 
up to him I could see no tracks, so I signalled to him to follow 
the scent he had found. Very deliberately he turned to the left 
and, on reaching the edge of the track, ran his nose up and 
down a blade of grass and then with a quick glance round at 
me, as if to say, 'It's all right, I was not mistaken', stepped into 
the grass which here was about eighteen inches high. Foot by 
foot he followed the scent and a hundred yards farther on, 
where there was a little depression with damp earth in it, I saw 
he was trailing a tiger. On the far side of the depression Robin 
intently examined a blade of grass, and on stooping down I saw 
he had found a spot of blood. From experiences I have had with 



animals lelt wounded in the jungles by others I am very 
suspicious of any blood I find on a tiger track. However, on this 
occasion it was all right for the blood was quite fresh, and no 
shots had been fired in this direction that morning, so I 
concluded the tiger was carrying a kill, possibly a cheetal, or 
maybe a big pig. A few yards farther on there was a dense 
patch of clerodendron some fifty yards square, on reaching 
which Robin stopped and looked round at me for further 
instructions. 

I recognized the tiger from his pug marks on the damp earth. 
He was a big tiger who had taken up his residence in the heavy 
scrub jungle on the far side of the Boar river and who, since 
our descent from the hills three months previously, had given 
me a lot of anxiety. The two roads and the fire track on which 
Maggie and I were accustomed to take our morning and 
evening walks ran through this jungle, and on several 
occasions when I was away from home Maggie and Robin had 
encountered the tiger while out for a walk. On each succeeding 
occasion the tiger had shown less inclination to give way to 
them and the stage had been reached when Robin no longer 
considered it was safe for Maggie to walk on these roads, and 
flatly refused to accompany her beyond the bridge. Fearing 
that some day there might be an accident I had decided to take 
the first opportunity that offered to shoot the tiger, and now- 
provided the tiger was lying up with his kill in the patch of 
clerodendron— the opportunity I had been waiting for had 
come. Robin had trailed the tiger down wind, so making a wide 
detour I approached the clerodendron from the opposite side. 
When we were thirty yards away Robin halted, raised his head 
into the wind, jerked his muzzle up and down a few times, and 
then looked round at me. Good enough. The tiger was there all 
right, so we regained the fire track and made for home. 

After breakfast I sent for Bahadur, told him about the tiger, and 
asked him to fetch two of our tenants, Dhanban and 
Dharmanand, both of whom could be relied on to carry out 
instructions, and both of whom were as expert at tree climbing 



as Bahadur and myself. By midday the three men had eaten 
their food and forgathered at our cottage, and after seeing that 
they had nothing in their pockets that would rattle I made them 
remove their shoes and arming myself with a 450/400 rifle, we 
set off. On the way I outlined my plans for the beat I intended 
the three men to carry out. The men knew the jungle as well as 
I did and when I told them where the tiger was lying up, and 
what I wanted them to do, they were full of enthusiasm. My 
plan was to put the men up on trees on three sides of the patch 
of clerodendron, to stir the tiger up while I guarded the fourth 
side. Bahadur was to be on the central tree and on receiving a 
signal from me, which would be the call of a leopard, he was to 
tap a branch and if the tiger tried to break out on either side 
the man nearest to it was to clap his hands. The essence of the 
whole enterprise was silence, for the three men would be 
within thirty or forty yards of the tiger and the slightest sound 
while approaching their trees, climbing them, or while waiting 
for my signal, would ruin the plan. 

On reaching the spot where Robin had picked up the tiger's 
scent I made Dhanban and Dharmanand sit down, while I took 
Bahadur and put him up a tree twenty yards from the 
clerodendron, and opposite where I intended taking my stand. 
Then one by one I took the other two men and put them up in 
trees to Bahadur's right and left. All three men were in sight of 
each odier, and all three overlooked the patch of clerodendron 
and would, therefore, be able to see any movement the tiger 
made, but they would be screened from me by a belt of trees 
After the last man was safely on his tree, without a sound 
having been made, I went back to the fire track and going a 
hundred yards up it met— at right angles— another fire track 
that skirted the foot of a long low hill. This second fire track 
bordered the patch of clerodendron on its fourth side. Opposite 
the tree on which Bahadur was sitting, a narrow and shallow 
ravine ran up the side of the hill. The ravine was much used by 
game and I felt sure the tiger on being disturbed would make 
for it. On the right-hand side of the ravine, and ten yards up the 



hill, there was abig jamun tree. When planning the beat I had 
intended sitting on this tree and shooting the tiger as he went 
up the ravine past me. But now, on reaching the tree, I found I 
could not climb it with the heavy rifle in my hands and as there 
were no other trees nearby I decided to sit on the ground. So, 
clearing the dry leaves from the root, I sat down with my back 
to the tree. 

I had two reasons for giving the call of a leopard. One, a signal 
to Bahadur to start tapping a branch with the dry stick I had 
left with him: the other, to reassure the tiger that it was safe 
for him to cross the fire track, and to disarm any suspicion he 
may have had that he was being driven towards danger. When I 
was comfortably seated on the ground I pushed up the safety 
catch and putting the rifle to my shoulder, gave the call of a 
leopard. A few seconds later Bahadur started tapping with his 
stick and he had only tapped a few times when the bushes 
parted and a magnificent tiger stepped out on the fire track 
and came to a stand. For ten years I had been trying to get a 
cine-photograph of a tiger, and though I had seen tigers on 
many occasions I had not succeeded in getting one satisfactory 
picture. And now out in the open, twenty yards from me with 
not a leaf nor a blade of grass between us, and the sun shining 
on his beautifully marked winter coat, was a tiger that I would 
have gone anywhere and given anything to photograph. I have 
on occasio ns stalked an animal, maybe for hours or maybe for 
days, and on getting up to it raised my rifle and after taking 
careful aim lowered it, and then attracting the animal's 
attention flourished my hat, giving myself the pleasure of 
seeing it bound away unhurt. I would very gladly have treated 
this tiger in the same way, but I did not feel that I would be 
justified in doing so. Apart from consideration of Maggie, Sher 
Singh and other small boys grazed their cattle in this jungle, 
and the women and children of the village collected dry sticks 
in it, and though the tiger had not harmed man or beast his 
method of demonstrating was very terrifying and might easily 
result in an accident. 



After stepping out on the fire track the tiger stood for a minute 
or two looking to his right and to his left, and over his shoulder 
in the direction of Bahadur. Then very leisurely he crossed the 
track and started up the hill on the left-hand side of the ravine. 
My sights had been on him from the time his head parted the 
clerodendron bushes, and when he was level with me I pressed 
the trigger. I do not think he so much as heard my shot, and as 
his legs folded up under him he slid backwards and came to 
rest near my feet. 

Beat No. 2 

When His Highness the Maharaja of Jind died— full of years 
and loved by all who knew him— India lost one of her finest 
sportsmen. Ruler of a territory of 1,299 square miles with a 
population of 324,700 and a princely rent-roll, the Maharaja 
was one of the most unassuming men it has been my good 
fortune to meet. His hobbies were training gun-dogs and tiger 
shooting, and at both these sports he had few equals. When I 
firist knew him he had four hundred dogs in his kennels and to 
see him schooling young dogs, and later handling them in the 
field, was a lesson in patience and gentleness that I never tired 
of watching. Only once did I ever hear the Maharaja raise his 
voice, or use a whip, to a dog. At dinner that night when the 
Maharani asked if the dogs had behaved themselves the 
Maharaja said, 'No, Sandy was very disobedient and I had to 
give him a good thrashing. 1 

The Maharaja and I had been out bird shooting that day. A long 
strip of grass and bush jungle was being beaten towards us by 
a line of elephants and men. At the end of the strip was an open 
stretch of ground some fifty yards wide. The Maharaja and I 
were standing a few yards apart at the farther edge of the open 
ground, with short grass behind us. Sitting in a row to the 
Maharaja's left were three young Labradors, Sandy golden 
coloured, the other two black. The line put up a black partridge 
and the Maharaja dropped it on the open ground and sent one 
of the black dogs to retrieve it. Next a jungle-fowl came low 



over my head and I dropped it in the grass behind me. The 
second black dog retrieved this bird. Some peafowl now got up, 
but having heard the shots in front, broke away to the left and 
passed out of range. A hare then broke cover and checking at 
the Maharaja, who had turned round to speak to a servant 
behind him, turned at right angles and passed in front of me. 
Waiting until it was at extreme range— for it is not advisable to 
break game more than can be helped when young dogs are in 
the field— I fired, and the hare turned about and passing in 
front of both of us collapsed thirty yards to the right of 
the Maharaja. As it went over Sandy shot forward. 

'Sandy,Sandy/ shouted the Maharaja, but Sandy was listening 
to no one. His two companions had retrieved their birds and it 
was his turn now and nothing was going to stop him. In his 
stride he picked up the hare and racing back handed it to me. 
Returning to his master Sandy sat down in his allotted place, 
and was ordered to fetch the hare. Picking it up from where I 
had laid it down he trotted towards the Maharaja with it held 
high, and was waved away, farther, farther, to the right, 
still farther, until he reached the spot from where he had 
originally retrieved it. Here he was told to drop it and signalled 
to return. With drooping tail and hanging ears Sandy returned 
to his master a second time, and one of the other dogs was sent 
out to bring in the hare. When this had been done the Maharaja 
handed his gun to his servant, and taking a whip from him, 
caught Sandy by the scruff of his neck and gave him 'a good 
thrashing 1 . And a good thrashing it was but not for Sandy, for 
he was not touched, but for the ground on either side of him. 
When the Maharaja told his wife of Sandy's delinquency and 
the chastisement he had administered, I took a tablet from an 
attendant behind me— for the Maharaja was afflicted with total 
deafness— and wrote on it, 'Though Sandy Bahadur disobeyed 
you today he is the best dog in India, and will win the 
championship at the next gun-dog trials.' Later that year I 
received a telegram from the Maharaja which read, 'You were 
quite right. Sandy has won the Open Championship. 1 



The days were lengthening and the sun was getting hot, so 
making a very early start one morning I walked ten miles and 
arrived at the Maharaja's camp at Mohan as the family were 
sitting down to breakfast. 'You have come at a very opportune 
time,' said the Maharaja as I took a seat at his table, 'for today 
we are going to beat for the old tiger that has eluded us for 
three years. 1 I had heard this tiger discussed on many 
occasions and knew how keen the Maharaja was to outwit and 
shoot it. When,therefore, he offered me the best of the 
three machans that had been put up for the beat, and the loan 
of a rifle, I declined his offer and said I would prefer to be a 
spectator. At ten o'clock the Maharaja and Maharani, their two 
daughters and a girl friend and I motored down the road up 
which I had walked earlier that morning, to where the beat was 
waiting for us. 

The ground to be beaten was a valley running deep into the 
foothills, with a small stream winding through it, and flanked 
on either side by hills three hundred feet high. At its lower end, 
where the road crossed it, the valley was about fifty yards 
wide, and half a mile farther up it again narrowed to fifty yards. 
Between these two points the valley widened out to three or 
four hundred yards and here, where there was a dense patch of 
cover several hundred acres in extent, the tiger was thought to 
be lying up with the buffalo he had killed the previous night. At 
the upper end of the valley a small spur ran down from the hill 
on the right, and on a tree on this spur, a machan had been 
built which commanded the valley and the lower slopes of the 
hills on either side. Beyond the spur and on the far side of the 
stream, which here turned at right angles, two 
othermachans had been put up on trees thirty yards apart. 

Leaving our cars on the road we proceeded up the valley on 
foot, and guided by the head shikari and the secretary in 
charge of the beat, skirted to the left of the cover in which the 
tiger was said to be lying. When the Maharaja and his gun- 
bearer had taken their seats on the machan on the spur, the 
four ladies and I crossed the stream and occupied the 



two machans on the far side of it. The head shikari and the 
secretary then left us, and returned to the road to start the 
beat. 

The machan I was on, with the two princesses, was a solidly- 
built affair laid with a thick carpet, with silk cushions to sit on. 
Accustomed only to sitting on hard branches, the luxury of 
the machan— following on an early rise and a long walk- 
made me drowsy and I was on the point of falling asleep when I 
was roused to full wakefulness by the distant sound of a bugle; 
the beat had started. Taking part in the beat were ten 
elephants, the Secretaries, A.D.C.s, household staff of the 
Maharaja, the head shikari and his assistants, and two hundred 
men collected from the surrounding villages. The heavy cover 
on the floor of the valley was to be beaten by the elephants on 
which the Secretaries and others were mounted, while the two 
hundred men beat the slopes on either side. Some of these 
beaters were to form a line on the two ridges and walk ahead 
of the beat to prevent the tiger from breaking out. 

All the arrangements for the beat, and the beat itself, were 
intensely interesting for me for I was witnessing as a spectator 
an event in which I had hitherto always been an actor. There 
was nothing in the arrangements or in the conduct of the beat 
that could be found fault with. The time of day had been well 
chosen; we had been led to our machans in perfect silence; and 
that the cover was being well beaten was evident from the 
number of birds, including kalege pheasants, jungle-fowl, and 
peafowl, that the line was putting up. Beats are always 
exciting, for from the moment the distant shouting of the men 
is heard, the tiger can be expected to be on the move. The 
Maharaja was handicapped by deafness but he had a good man 
with him, and presently I saw this man pointing to the right. 
After looking in this direction for a moment or two the 
Maharaja shook his head, and a little later a sambhar stag 
crossed the stream and on winding the Maharaja dashed past 
us up the valley. 



The line of men on the ridge on the left was now visible, and 
the time had come for the tiger to appear. On came the beat 
with every man taking part in it shouting and clapping his 
hands, and every yard they advanced my hopes of the Maharaja 
shooting the tiger on which he had set his heart diminished, for 
no bird or animal had given an alarm-call. My young 
companions on the machan were keyed up, and the Maharaja 
was holding his rifle ready, for if the tiger appeared now he 
would have to take a quick shot. But rifles were of no use today, 
for the tiger was not in the beat. Ladders were produced and a 
very dejected party climbed down from the machans and joined 
an even more dejected staff on the ground. No one engaged in 
the beat had seen anything of the tiger, and no one knew what 
had gone wrong. But that something had gone wrong was 
evident, for shortly before our arrival in the cars the tiger had 
been heard calling in the valley. I had a suspicion that I knew 
why the beat had miscarried but, as I was only a spectator, I 
said nothing. After a picnic lunch we returned to camp, and 
while the others rested I went off and had a grand evening's 
fishing on the Kosi, for it was the latter end of April and the 
fishing was at its best. 

During and after dinner that night, the abortive beat of the day 
and five previous unsuccessful beats for the same tiger was 
discussed in minute detail and a reason sought for their failure. 
On the first occasion on which a beat had been organized in the 
valley for this particular tiger, he had come out on the right of 
the machan and the Maharaja, taking an awkward shot from a 
fixed seat, had missed him. In the succeeding beats, carried out 
over a period of three years, the tiger had not again been seen, 
though he was known to have been in the valley before the 
beats started. While the others had been talking and writing on 
tablets for the Maharaja's benefit, I had been thinking. The 
Maharaja was a good sportsman, and if I could help him to 
shoot the tiger on which he had set his heart it was up to me to 
try. A mistake had been made that day in taking the Maharaja's 
party to the machans, past the spot where the tiger was 



thought to be lying up, but this mistake was not responsible for 
the failure of the beat, for the tiger had left the valley at about 
the time the Maharaja's party had entered it. The single alarm- 
call of a kakar, heard shortly after we had left our cars, was all 
the foundation I had for my suspicion that the tiger walked out 
of the valley as we walked into it. Later when it became evident 
that an empty jungle had been beaten, I looked round to see if 
there was any other way for the tiger to leave the valley 
without passing the machans. Starting on the ridge behind 
the machans a landslide extended right down into the valley. 
The kakar had called at the upper end of this landslide and if 
there was a game track here running down to the cover in 
which the tiger had his kill, then it was guite possible that he 
left the valley by this track every time he heard preparations 
being made for a beat. 

The plan that had been forming in my mind while the others 
talked was to put the Maharaja on the ridge, where 
the kakar had called, and beat the tiger up to him. Beating a 
second time for the tiger on the following day had been vetoed 
by every one, on the ground that as the tiger had not been 
found on a fresh kill there was no hope of finding him on a stale 
one. So even if my plan failed no harm would be done, for no 
arrangements had been made for the following day. Taking a 
tablet from one of the secretaries I wrote on it, 'If you can be 
ready at 5 a.m. tomorrow, I should like to do a one-man beat for 
the tiger we failed to get today 1 , and handed the paper to the 
Maharaja. After reading what I had written the Maharaja 
passed the paper to his secretary, and from hand to hand it 
went round the room. I expected opposition from the staff, and 
it came now. However, as the Maharaja was willing to fall in 
with my plans, the staff reluctantly agreed to all conventions 
being set aside, and to the Maharaja going out with me next 
morning accompanied only by two gun-bearers. 

Punctually at 5 a.m. the Maharaja, his two gun-bearers, and I, 
left the camp by car and motored three miles down the road to 
where an elephant, carrying a small machan, was waiting for 



us. Transferring the Maharaja and his two men to the elephant 
I set out on foot to guide the elephant through several miles of 
forest in which I had never been before. Fortunately I have a 
sense of direction, and though it was dark when we started I 
was able to steer a more or less straight course, and as the sun 
was rising we arrived on the ridge where the landslide started. 
Here I was delighted to find a well-used game-track leading up 
from the valley, and on a tree near the track I put up 
the machan. When the Maharaja and one gun bearer had taken 
their seats on the machan I sent the elephant away, and taking 
the other gun-bearer with me, put him up on a tree farther 
along the ridge. These preparations completed, I set off to do a 
one-man beat. 

The way down into the valley was terribly steep and rough but 
as I was not hampered with a rifle, I accomplished descent 
safely. Passing the machans we had sat on the previous day, I 
went down the valley on silent feet, and two hundred yards 
beyond the heavy cover in which I suspected the tiger was 
lying, I turned and retraced my steps, talking to myself in a low 
voice as I did so. Where the tiger dragged the buffalo into the 
heavy cover there was a fallen tree. Lighting a cigarette I sat 
down on this tree, to listen if the jungle had anything to tell me. 
All remained quiet, so after coughing a few times and 
drumming my heels against the hollow tree I set out to find the 
kill and see if the tiger had returned to it. I found the kill 
tucked away under some thick bushes and was delighted to see 
that the tiger had eaten a meal only a few minutes previously 
and that the ground on which he had been lying was still warm. 
Running back to the hollow tree I hammered on it with a stone 
and shouted at the top of my voice, to let the man with the 
Maharaja know that the tiger was coming. A minute or two 
later a rifle shot rang out above me, and when I got to the ridge 
I found the Maharaja standing on the game track, looking at 
the fine tiger he had shot. 

In the palace at Jind, now occupied by the Maharaja's eldest 
son, there is a skin with a label which reads, 'Jim's Tiger'. And 



in the late Maharaja's game-book there is an entry giving the 
date and place, and the circumstances in which the old tiger 
was shot. 

Beat No. 3 

It was the last day of a memorable shoot. Memorable not only 
for us who had been privileged to take part in it, but also for 
the administrators of the country, for a Viceroy had for the first 
time in the history of India left the beaten track to spend a few 
days in the Kaladhungi jungles. 

No individual's movements were more strictly ruled by 
precedents than the movements of the Viceroy of India, and 
any deviation from the beaten track was a contingency that had 
never been contemplated, and for which no provision had been 
made. When, therefore. Lord Linlithgow, shortly after assuming 
the Viceroyalty of India, decided to leave the track his 
predecessors had followed and blaze a track for himself, it was 
only natural that his decision should have caused consternation 
throughout the land. Custom decreed that the ruler of India 
should tour the southern provinces of his domain during the 
ten days hiatus between the closing of his Legislative Offices in 
Delhi and their reopening in Simla, and it was Lord 
Linlithgow's decision not to conform with this age-old custom 
that caused the long to be remembered flutter in the 
government dovecotes. 

I, a mere man in the street without any connexion with 
Government, was happily ignorant of the working of wheels 
within wheels of the administration when one day, towards the 
end of March, as I was setting out from our cottage at 
Kaladhungi to catch a fish for our dinner. Ram Singh, whose 
duty it was to fetch our daily post from the Post Office two 
miles away, came running back with a telegram which he said 
the Postmaster had informed him was very urgent. The 
telegram, which had been redirected from Naini Tal, was from 
Hugh Stable, Military Secretary to the Viceroy. It informed me 
that the Viceroy's visit to South India had been cancelled, and 



asked if I could suggest any place where the Viceroy could 
spend ten days, with the possibility of getting a little shooting 
before proceeding to Simla for the summer. The telegram 
concluded with a request for an early reply as time was short, 
and the matter urgent. Ram Singh does not speak English but 
having served us for thirty years he can understand it, and 
having stood round finding odd jobs to do while I read the 
telegram to Maggie, he now said he would hurry up and have 
his food and be ready in a few minutes to take my reply to 
Haldwani. Haldwani— our nearest telegraph and telephone 
office— is fourteen miles from Kaladhungi and by sending my 
reply by Ram Singh, instead of by the regular dak runner, I 
would save a matter of some twenty-four hours. After Ram 
Singh had left with my reply to Hugh Stable which read, 

'Please call me on Haldwani telephone at eleven hours 
tomorrow', I picked up my rod for the second time, for one can 
do a lot of thinking while fishing and I had much to think about, 
and, further, I still had our dinner to catch. Hugh Stable's 
telegram was quite clearly in the nature of an SOS, and the 
question I had to decide was, what could I do to help him? 

Going up the Kota road for two miles I cut across the lower end 
of the Farm Yard— where when a small boy I shot my first 
leopard— and made for a pool in the river in which a three- 
pound mahseer with whom I was acquainted lived. As I 
approached the pool I saw in the sand the pug marks of a tiger 
that had crossed the river early that morning. At the head of 
the pool, where the water runs fast and deep, there are three 
big rocks a foot above water which are continually wet with 
spray and in consequence as slippery as ice. Leopards use 
these rocks as stepping stones and one day I saw the tiger, 
whose pug marks were now on the sand, trying to do the same. 
I had chased the tiger that day for a mile without his knowing I 
was after him and twice I got to within shooting range, and on 
both occasions held my fire as I was not sure of killing him 
outright. And then as I saw he was making for the river I just 
kept him in sight for I knew I would get the shot I wanted when 



he was fording the river. As he approached the river it became 
evident that he intended crossing it dryshod by way of the 
stepping stones, and not wading it as I at first thought he 
intended doing. This suited me admirably for there was a 
twenty-foot drop on our side down which the tiger would have 
to go before reaching the river, and as he went over the edge to 
climb down I ran forward and lay down on the top of the bank 
above him. 

The three rocks were at a distance apart that an Olympian 
athlete could, if he had a good run, have taken in a hop, skip, 
and jump, and which I had seen leopards do in three graceful 
bounds. The tiger had just accomplished the first jump safely as 
I poked my head over the edge, but he bungled the second 
jump, and as his feet shot off the slippery rock he went heels 
over head into the deep and broken water. The noise from the 
water prevented my hearing what he said, but I could guess 
what it was for I had myself slipped on that self-same rock 
while trying to cross the river dryshod. On the far side of the 
broken water there is a short beach of dry sand. Floundering 
out on to this beach the tiger shook himself and then lay down 
and rolled over and over, drying his beautiful rich winter coat 
in the hot sand. Then getting to his feet he shook himself for a 
second time and walked guietly away to whatever place he was 
making for, without let or hindrance from me, for in the jungle 
it is not considered cricket to molest an animal that has 
provided entertainment. And now the pug marks of the tiger 
were showing on the sand again, but this time he had essayed 
the stepping stones safely for his feet when he crossed the 
sand had been dry. 

Below the stepping stones a rock jutted out from the far bank 
making a backwater which was my friend the three-pounder's 
favourite hunting ground. Twice before a Jock Scott cast on the 
sloping rock and gently drawn off, had brought 
the mahseer out with a rush. The throw was a long and a 
difficult one, for the branch of a tree hung low over the 
backwater and the rod had to be used from a crouching 



position, for mahseerwho have enemies on land, in the air, and 
in the water, are keen of sight and need a careful approach. 
Leaving the sandy beach, with the pug marks on it, I went 
upstream for a short distance, and while the ten-foot tapered 
cast I made that morning from carefully selected lengths of gut 
was soaking under a stone, put my rod together and had a 
smoke. When all was ready I pulled what I considered to be the 
exact length of line off the reel, and holding it carefully looped 
in my left hand crept down to the one spot from where it was 
possible to make a sideways cast on to the rock, for the bank 
behind did not permit of an orthodox cast. The new No. 8 Jock 
Scott put on in honour of the three-pounder landed exactly 
where I wanted it to, and as the drag of the line drew it off the 
rock into deep water, there was a swirl and a splash and for the 
third time my friend was well and truly hooked. It is not 
possible, when using light tackle, to stop the first mad rush of 
a mahseer, but by using just the right amount of strain he can 
be guided away from any snag he is making for, provided the 
snag is not on the same side of the river as the angler. I was 
fishing from the right bank and thirty yards below where I had 
hooked the fish a curved root jutted out into the water. On the 
two previous occasions the fish had broken me on this root, but 
I managed to steer him clear of it now with only a few inches to 
spare. Once he was in the pool, he was safe, and after letting 
him play himself out I drew him to the sandy beach and landed 
him by hand, for I had brought no landing net with me. My 
estimate of three pounds was half a pound out, on the right 
side, so not only would he furnish us with a dinner, but he 
would also provide a meal for a sick boy Maggie was nursing in 
the village, who loved fish above all other things. 

Having followed the advice given me on the rifle range when I 
was a boy, by sending Hugh Stable a non-committal telegram, I 
had given myself ample time to think, and to what extent my 
seeing the pug marks of the tiger and my success with 
the mahseer influenced my decision I cannot say; anyway, by 
the time I got home I had decided to tell Hugh Stable that 



Kaladhungi was the only place I could suggest for the Viceroy's 
holiday Maggie had tea ready on the veranda and while we 
were talking over the decision I had come to, Bahadur arrived. 
Bahadur can keep his mouth shut when there is any necessity 
to do so, so I told him about the telegram I had received from 
Delhi. Bahadur's eyes literally dance when he is excited, and I 
have never seen them dance as they did that day. A possibility 
of the Viceroy coming to Kaladhungi! Why, such a thing had 
never before been heard of. A great bandobast would have to 
be made and fortunately it was just the right time of the year to 
make it, for the crops had been harvested and every man in the 
village would be available. Later, when it became known that 
the Viceroy was coming to our jungles, not only our own 
tenants but every man in Kaladhungi was as excited and as 
pleased as Bahadur had been when he heard the news. Not 
because of any profit or preferment they hoped to derive from 
the visit, but simply and solely because of their desire to help in 
their own humble way to make the visit a success. 

It was dark when I started on my fourteen-mile walk to 
Haldwani next morning, for I wanted to see Geoff Hopkins, who 
was camped at Fatehpur, before my conversation with Hugh 
Stable. The road runs through jungle for the first seven miles 
and at that hour of the morning the jungle folk and I had it to 
ourselves. A mile beyond the Kaladhungi bazaar it started to 
get light and in the dust of the road I saw the fresh pug marks 
of a male leopard, going in the same direction as I was. 
Presently on rounding a bend in the road, I saw the leopard two 
hundred yards ahead of me. He seemed to sense my presence 
for I had hardly rounded the bend when he turned his head and 
looked at me. However, he kept to the road, occasionally 
looking over his shoulder, and when I had reduced the distance 
between us to fifty yards, he stepped off the road into a light 
patch of grass. Keeping steadily on and looking straight ahead, 
out of the corner of my eye I saw him crouched down in the 
grass a few feet from the road. A hundred yards along when I 
looked over my shoulder I saw he was back on the road. To him 



I was just a wayfarer for whom he had made way and a few 
hundred yards farther on he left the road and entered a deep 
ravine. For a mile I had the road to myself, and then out of the 
jungle on the right trotted five red dogs. Fleet of foot, and 
fearless; flitting through the forests as silent and free as a 
butterfly, and when hungry, eating only of the best. Of all the 
animals I know none has a better life, than the Indian red dog. 

Geoff and Zillah Hopkins were sitting down to an early 
breakfast when I reached the forest bungalow, and were as 
pleased and excited as they could be when I told them of the 
errand on which I was going to Haldwani. Geoff was at that 
time Special Forest Officer, Tarai and Bhabar Government 
Estates, and without his help and co-operation I could make no 
concrete suggestions to Hugh Stable. Geoff rose nobly to the 
occasion. For the success of the shoot it was essential for me to 
have two shooting blocks in his forests. Both the blocks I 
wanted were fortunately available at the time, and Geoff said 
he would reserve them for me. He also very kindly offered me 
the Dachauri block in the adjoining government forest, which 
he had reserved for himself. Everything, from seeing the pug 
marks of the tiger in the sand, the catching of the mahseer, and 
now my successful visit to Geoff, was going splendidly, and I 
never felt the miles as they passed under rny feet as I 
completed my journey to Haldwani. 

Hugh Stable was on the telephone punctually at eleven o'clock 
and for the next hour we carried on an uninterrupted 
conversation, over the three-hundred-mile-long line. In that 
hour Hugh learnt that there was a small village at the foothills 
of the Himalayas called Kaladhungi; that this village was 
surrounded by jungles in which there was a variety of game; 
that I knew of no place in India where a more pleasant holiday 
could be spent. From Hugh I learnt that the Viceregal party 
would consist of Their Excellencies Lord and Lady Linlithgow, 
and their three daughters, the Ladies Anne, Joan, and Doreen 
(Bunty) Hope. With the party would come H.E.'s personal staff, 
for even when on holiday the Viceroy of India does a full day's 



work. Finally I learnt I had only fifteen days in which to make 
all my preparations for the shoot. Mouse Maxwell, the 
Controller of the Viceroy's Household, motored from Delhi to 
Kaladhungi the following day, and he was followed by the head 
of the Police, the head of the C.I.D., the head of the Civil 
Administration, the head of the Forest Department, and by 
many other heads. But most terrifying of all by a Guardsman 
who informed me he was bringing a company of soldiers to 
Kaladhungi to guard the person of the Viceroy. 

Bahadur had been right when he said a great bandobast would 
have to be made, but how great that bandobast would have to 
be neither he nor I had dreamed. However, with the whole¬ 
hearted help and co-operation of all concerned everything had 
progressed smoothly and well, without a single hitch or set¬ 
back. Four beats had been successfully carried out and four 
tigers had been cleanly shot, with the minimum expenditure of 
ammunition, by people who had never before seen tigers in the 
wilds. Only those who have taken part in tiger beats will know 
how great an achievement this had been. And now the last day 
of that memorable shoot had come with only one, the youngest, 
member of the party left to shoot a tiger. The beat that day was 
to take place on a semicircular bit of ground which in bygone 
years had been the bed of the Boar river, but which now is 
clothed with dense tree and scrub jungle interspersed with 
small patches of nal grass, and thickets of wild oranges. 

Five machans had been built in trees on what at one time had 
been the bank of the river, and the tiger was to be beaten off 
the low ground towards these machans. 

Making a wide detour, for many beats are ruined by taking the 
guns to their machans past the cover in which the tiger is 
assumed to be lying up, I brought the party up from behind 
the machans and while the stops, who had accompanied us, 
fanned out to right and left to take up position on the trees I 
had previously marked for them, Peter Borwick (one of H.E.'s 
A.D.C.s), Bahadur, and I, started to put the guns in position. On 
No. 1 machan I put Anne, and on No. 2 machan I put H.E. No. 



3 machan had been built in the only tree available at this spot, 
a stunted kart bair (wood plum) tree. It had been my intention 
to put Bahadur on thismachan to act as a stop. On being 
stopped I expected the tiger to turn to the left, and for this 
reason I had selected No. 4 machan for Bunty, the only member 
of the party who had not shot a tiger. 

Coming from the direction of the cover, in which I knew the 
tiger was lying up, a game-track ran up the bank and passed 
right under No. 3 machan. I was certain the tiger would come 
along this track and as themachan was only six feet above 
ground I had decided that, though it would be quite safe to put 
an experienced stop on it, it would be too dangerous for a gun. 
Now, however, as the two girls, Peter, Bahadur, and I, reached 
the machan and Bahadur started to climb on to it, on the spur 
of the moment I changed my plans. Putting my hand on 
the machan, which was on a level with my head, I whispered to 
Bunty that I wanted her to sit on it with Peter to keep her 
company. This— after I had pointed out the danger— she 
consented to do without a moment's hesitation. I then begged 
her not to shoot at the tiger until it reached a spot on the track 
that I would mark, and to take very careful aim at its throat. 
Bunty promised to do both of these things, so Peter and I lifted 
her on to the machan. After I had given Peter a leg up I handed 
him my 450/400 D.B. rifle, a similar weapon to the one Bunty 
was armed with. (Peter was unarmed, for he was to have 
accompanied me in the beat.) Then going down the bank I 
walked up the game-track, and when within twenty feet of 
themachan, laid a dry stick across the track and as I did so I 
looked up at Bunty and she nodded her head. 

Lady Joan, Bahadur, and I, now went to the tree on which No. 

4 machan had been built. This machan was twenty feet above 
ground and from it to No. 3 machan— thirty yards away— there 
was a clear and uninterrupted view. When I climbed the ladder 
after Joan to hand her rifle, I begged her not to allow the tiger 
to reach No. 3 machan if Bunty and Peter failed to stop it. 'I 
will do my best/ she said, adding, 'don't you worry/ There were 



no bushes and only a few scattered trees on this part of the 
bank, and the tiger would be in full view of these 
two machans from the time it left the cover sixty yards away 
until it was, I hoped, shot dead by Bunty. Putting Bahadur on 
No. 5 machan, to act as a stop if necessary, I circled outside the 
beat and came out on to the Boar river. 

The sixteen elephants that were to do the beating were 
collected a quarter of a mile down the river, near the pool in 
which I caught the mahseer. They were in charge of old Mohan, 
a friend of many years standing, who for thirty years had been 
Wyndham's head shikari, and who knew more about tigers than 
any man in India. Mohan was on the look-out for me, and on 
seeing me come out of the jungle and wave my hat he started 
the elephants up the bed of the river. Sixteen elephants walking 
in line over boulder-strewn ground take some time to cover a 
quarter of a mile, and while I sat on a rock and smoked I had 
ample time to think, and the more I thought the more uneasy I 
became. For the first time in my life I was endangering the life 
of one, and quite possibly two, human beings, and the fact that 
it was the first time gave me little comfort. Before his arrival in 
Kaladhungi Lord Linlithgow asked me to draw up a set of rules. 
These rules had been scrupulously obeyed, and with over three 
hundred people in camp, and daily excursions to near and 
distant shooting and fishing grounds, no one had received so 
much as a scratch. And now on this last day I, whom everyone 
trusted, had done a thing that I was bitterly regretting. On a 
frail machan, only six feet above ground, and on which I would 
not have trusted any man of my acquaintance, I had put a 
young girl little more than sixteen years of age to shoot a tiger 
as it came straight towards her, the most dangerous shot that 
one can take at a tiger. Both Bunty and Peter were as brave as 
tigers, as was abundantly evident by the fact that after I had 
pointed out the danger to them they had unhesitatingly taken 
their seats on the machan. But bravery alone without accuracy 
of aim would not be sufficient, and of their ability to hold a rifle 
straight I had no knowledge. Mohan arrived with the elephants 



while I was still undecided whether to call off the beat or go on 
with it, and when I told him what I had done he drew in his 
breath— the Indian equivalent to the Western whistle— closed 
his eyes tight and on reopening them said, 

'Don't ghabrao (worry) Sahib. Everything will be all right. 1 

Calling the mahouts together I told them it was very essential 
for us to move the tiger without frightening it, and that after 
lining-out on the river bank they would take their signal from 
me. When they saw me take my hat off and wave it they would 
give one shout, after which they would clap their hands and 
continue to clap them until I replaced the hat on my head. This 
procedure would be repeated at short intervals and if it failed 
to move the tiger I would give the signal to advance, and the 
advance would be made in silence and dead slow. Our initial 
shout would serve a double purpose, it would rouse the tiger 
from his sleep, and it would alert the guns. 

A strip of jungle three hundred yards wide and five hundred 
yards long was to be beaten, and when the elephants had lined- 
out on either side of me I took off my hat and waved it. After 
giving one lusty shout the men started clapping their hands 
and after they had clapped for three or four minutes, I replaced 
my hat. There were sambhar, cheetal, kakar, peafowl, and 
jungle-fowl in that area, and I listened anxiously for an alarm- 
call, but heard none. Five minutes later I again took off my hat 
and waved it and a minute, or it may have been two, later, a 
rifle shot rang out and I started to count the seconds, for much 
can be learnt by the spacing of shots in a tiger beat. One, two, 
three, four, five, I counted and I was beginning to breathe 
again when two shots rang out in quick succession. Again one, 
two, three, four, and a fourth shot rang out. The first and the 
fourth shot had been fired when the muzzle of the rifle was 
facing in my direction. When the other two shots were fired the 
muzzle had been facing away from me. This could mean only 
one thing, that there had been trouble and that Joan had had to 
help, for the machan H.E. was on was not within sight of 
Bunty's machan. 



With my heart racing and fears assailing me that I was too 
frightened to give expression to, I handed over the line to 
Mohan to bring up and told Ajmat, the mahout of the elephant I 
was on, to go as fast as he could straight to where the shots 
had been fired. Ajmat, who has been trained by Wyndham, is 
absolutely fearless and the best man on an elephant I have ever 
known. And his elephant is as well trained and as fearless as he 
is. Straight through thorn bushes, over big rocks and broken 
ground, and under overhanging branches we went, my uneasy 
thoughts racing ahead of us. And then as we crashed into a 
patch of twelve-foot-high nalgrass the elephant hesitated 
before going on again, and Ajmat leant back and whispered, 
'She can smell the tiger, so hold tight Sahib, for you are 
unarmed. 1 Only another hundred yards to go now, and as yet no 
signal had come from the guns, each of whom had been 
provided with a railwayman's whistle with instructions to blow 
it if help was needed. But the fact that no whistle had sounded 
gave me no comfort for I knew from past experience that in 
times of excitement even bigger things than whistles can be 
dropped from a machan. And then through the trees I caught 
sight of Joan and could have shouted with joy and relief, for she 
was unconcernedly sitting on her machan with her rifle across 
her knees. On seeing me she spread her arms wide— which I 
rightly interpreted as meaning a big tiger— and then pointed 
down in front of Bunty's machan. 

The rest of the story, which makes my heart miss a beat as I 
relate it even after this lapse of fifteen years, is soon told; a 
story which, but for the courage of three young people and 
superlative marksmanship, would have ended in a terrible 
tragedy. 

Our shout when I started the beat was clearly heard by the 
guns, also the faint clapping of our hands. Then in the interval 
the tiger broke cover sixty yards in front of machan No. 3, and 
came slowly along the game-track. It reached the foot of the 
bank as we on the elephants shouted the second time. On 
hearing this shout the tiger stopped and looked over its 



shoulder. Satisfied that there was no need to hurry, it stood 
listening for a minute or so, and then started up the bank. 
When it reached the spot where I had laid a dry stick across 
the track, Bunty fired, but she fired at its chest, for the tiger 
was holding its head low and she could not see its throat. On 
receiving the shot, which was well placed, and before either 
Bunty or Peter was able to get in a second shot, the tiger 
sprang forward with a roar and attacked the machan from 
underneath. While the frailmachan was rocking on the stunted 
tree and threatening to disintegrate under the onslaught of the 
tiger, and while Bunty and Peter were trying desperately to 
push the muzzles of their rifles through the floor of 
themachan, Joan, from her machan thirty yards away, knocked 
the tiger down with her first shot and as it fell to the ground 
put a second bullet into it. On receiving Joan's second bullet 
the tiger started to go down the bank, evidently with the 
intention of regaining the thick cover it had just left, and Bunty 
then put a bullet through the back of its head. 

That was our Viceroy's first visit to Kaladhungi, but it was not 
his last, and during the many subsequent occasions on which 
he honoured our small foothill village with his presence I never 
had one moment's anxiety for his safety, or for the safety of 
those who accompanied him. For I never again took risks such 
as I took on the last day of that memorable shoot. 



Chapter Eleven 

FROM NOVEMBER TO MARCH THE climate of the Himalayan 
foothills has no equal, and the best of these five months is 
February. In February the air is crisp and invigorating and the 
wealth of bird life that migrated down from the high mountains 
in November, in search of food and of warmth, is still with us. 
The deciduous trees that have stood gaunt and naked 
throughout the autumn and winter are bursting into bloom, or 
are putting on a mantle of tender leaf buds of varying shades of 
green or pink. In February spring is in the very air, in the sap of 
all trees, and in the blood of all wild life. Whether it be on the 
mountains in the north, or the plains in the south, or in the 
shelter of the foothills, spring comes in a night. It is winter 
when you go to bed one night and when you awaken next 
morning it is spring, and round you all nature is rejoicing in 
anticipation of the pleasures that lie ahead, plentiful food, 
warmth, and the reproduction of life. The migrant birds are 
packing into small groups, these groups will join others, and on 
the appointed day and at the command of the leaders the 
pigeons, paroquets, thrushes, and other fruit-eaters will fly up 
the valleys to their selected nesting grounds while insect-eaters 
flitting from tree to tree in the same direction and on the same 
quest will cover at most a few miles a day. While the migrants 
are preparing for departure and the regular inhabitants of the 
foothills are selecting each his own mate and looking for a 
building site, the combined population of the jungle are vying 
with each other in a vocal contest which starts at daylight and 
continues non-stop until dark. In this contest all take part even 
to the predatory birds whose most vocal member, the serpent 
eagle, while showing as a mere speck against the blue sky 
sends his piercing cry back to earth. 

While instructing troops in jungle warfare I was in a forest one 
day in Central India with a party of men among whom were 
several bird enthusiasts. High in the heavens above us a 
serpent eagle was circling and screaming. The party was a new 
draft from different parts of the United Kingdom, destined for 



Burma, none of whom had ever seen a serpent eagle. Waiting 
until we came to an open glade I pointed to a speck in the sky. 
Field-glasses were produced and disappointment was 
expressed at the bird being too far away to identify or to see 
clearly. Telling my companions to stand quite still I took a 
three-inch-long reed from mv pocket, and sounded a note on it. 
This reed, split at one end and blocked up at the other, 
reproduced with great exactitude the piercing call of a young 
deer in distress and was used in my training for signalling, for 
it is the only natural sound to be heard— both by day and by 
night— in jungles in which there are deer, and it was, 
therefore, a sound least likely to attract the attention of an 
enemy. On hearing the sound the eagle stopped screaming, for 
though a serpent eagle, living principally on snakes, he does 
not despise other flesh. Closing his wings he dropped a few 
hundred feet and then again started soaring in circles. At each 
call he came nearer, until finally he was circling just above 
tree-top level where the party with me had a close and clear 
view of him. Do those who were in that party of fifty, and who 
survived the Burma campaign, remember that day in the 
Chindwara jungles and your disappointment at my not being 
able to make the eagle perch on a branch close enough to 
photograph? Never mind. Accompany me now on this spring 
morning and we will see many things just as interesting as that 
serpent eagle. 

You have travelled far on the road of knowledge since that 
distant Chindwara day. Self-preservation has taught you that 
the human eye has a field of vision of 180 degrees. Pin-pointing 
sound which at first you found so difficult is now second nature 
to you. And having learnt when a boy the difference between 
the smell of a rose and of a violet you can now identify each 
tree and plant by the smell of its flower even when that flower 
is at tree-top level, or hidden deep in the jungle. But much as 
you learnt and greatly as the knowledge has added to your 
confidence, safety and pleasure, much still remains to learn 
and on this beautiful spring morning we will add a little to our 



store of knowledge. 

The canal that forms the northern boundary of our estate, and 
in which the girls used to bathe, is conveyed across the 
watercourse I have previously referred to by an aqueduct. This 
aqueduct is known as Bijli Dant,which means, 'lightning water 
channel'. The original aqueduct built by Sir Henry Ramsay was 
destroyed by lightning many years ago, and because of a local 
superstition that lightning is attracted to a given spot by an evil 
spirit, usually in the form of a snake, the old foundations were 
not used and a parallel aqueduct was built that has been 
functioning now for half a century. Wild animals that visit the 
village at night from the jungles to the north, and who do not 
like wading or jumping the ten-foot-wide canal, pass under the 
aqueduct. So on this spring morning we will start our walk 
from this point. 

On the sand in the passage-way under the arch of the aqueduct 
are the tracks of hare, kakar, pig, porcupine, hyaena, and 
jackal. Of these the only tracks we will look closely at are the 
tracks of the porcupine, for, having been made after the night 
wind had died down, they are free of drift sand. Five toes and a 
pad and each footprint is distinct, for a porcupine has no need 
to stalk and does not superimpose one foot upon another. In 
front of each print is a small hole in the sand made by the 
porcupine's strong nails, on which he depends to a great extent 
for his food. The hind pads of porcupines are elongated. This 
projection, or heel, is not as marked as it is in the case of bear. 
It is, however, sufficiently marked to distinguish the track of a 
porcupine from the tracks of all other animals. If you want 
further confirmation, look closely at the track and you will see 
a number of finely-drawn lines running between, or parallel to, 
the track. These finely drawn lines are made by the long 
drooping quills of the porcupine when they make contact with 
the ground. A porcupine cannot cast or project its quills, which 
are barbed, and its method of defence or attack is to raise its 
quills on end and run backwards. At the end of a porcupine's 
tail are a number of hollow quills, not unlike long wine glasses 



on slender stems. These quills are used as a rattle to intimidate 
enemies, and to convey water to the porcupine's burrow. The 
quills readily fill with water when submerged, and the 
porcupine uses this water to keep its burrow cool and free of 
dust. Porcupines are vegetarians and live on fruit, roots, and 
field-crops. They also consume the horns shed by deer and the 
horns of deer killed by leopards, wild dogs, and tigers, possibly 
to obtain calcium or some other vitamin absent in their normal 
food. Though a comparatively small animal a porcupine has a 
big heart, and he will defend himself against great odds. 

For a few hundred yards above the aqueduct the bed of the 
watercourse is stony and, except where a game-track crosses 
it, we shall find no more tracks until we come to a long stretch 
of fine silt, washed down from the foothills, on which the tracks 
of all the animals that use the watercourse as a highway show 
up clearly. This stretch of ground is flanked on either side by 
dense lantana in which deer, pig, peafowl, and jungle-fowl, 
shelter during daylight hours and into which only leopards, 
tigers, and porcupines venture at night. In the lantana you can 
now hear jungle-fowl scratching up the dead leaves, and a 
hundred yards away on the topmost branch of a 
leafless samal tree is perched their most deadly enemy, a 
crested eagle. The eagle is not only the enemy of jungle-fowl, 
he is also the enemy of peafowl. These are his natural prey and 
the fact that there are as many old birds as young ones in the 
jungle, is proof that they are able to look after themselves. For 
this reason I never interfered with crested eagles until one day, 
on hearing the distressed cry of a young deer, I hurried to the 
spot and found a crested eagle holding down a month- 
old cheetal fawn and tearing at its head, while the distracted 
mother ran round in circles striking at the bird with her 
forefeet. Desperately as the brave mother had tried to rescue 
her young one— and of this the scratches and blood on her 
muzzle bore ample proof— the great eagle had been too much 
for her, and though I was able to dispose of her enemy I was 
unable to do anything for her young, beyond putting it out of its 



misery, for even if I had been able to heal its wounds I would 
not have been able to restore its sight. That incident has cost 
the lives of many crested eagles in the jungles in which I have 
hunted, for though it is difficult to approach close enough to 
shoot them with a shotgun, they offer a good target for an 
accurate rifle. The bird on the samal tree, however, has nothing 
to fear from us for we have come out to see things, and not to 
deal with the enemies of young deer. In my catapult days the 
greatest battle in which a crested eagle has ever been engaged 
took place on a stretch of sand, in the bed of the river, a little 
below the Boar bridge. Possibly mistaking a fish cat for a hare 
the eagle stooped on it and either because he was unable to 
withdraw his talons, or because he lost his temper, became 
involved in life-and-death struggle. Both contestants were 
equally well armed for the battle; the cat with its teeth and 
claws, and the eagle with its beak and talons. It is greatly to be 
regretted that photography at that time was confined to studios 
and movie cameras were unknown, and that no record was 
made of that long-drawn-out and desperate battle. If a cat has 
nine lives an eagle has ten, and it was lives that ultimately 
proved the deciding factor. With one precarious life still in hand 
the eagle left his dead opponent on the sand, and trailing a 
broken wing went down to a pool in the river where, after 
quenching his thirst, he surrendered his tenth life. 

Several game-tracks lead on to the open ground from 
the lantana and while we have been looking at the eagle a 
young kakar stag has walked out of the lantana on to the 
watercourse, fifty yards away, with the intention of crossing it. 

If we freeze and remain frozen, he will take no notice of us. Of 
all the animals in the jungle the kakar gives the impression of 
being most on his toes. Even here on this open ground he is 
walking on tiptoe with his hind legs tucked well under him and 
at the first indication of danger, be it conveyed by sight, sound, 
or smell, he will dash away at top speed. The kakar is 
sometimes described as being a mean and a cowardly little 
animal, and unreliable as a jungle informant. With this 



description I do not agree. No animal can be called mean for 
that is exclusively a human trait, and no animal that lives in the 
densest jungles with tigers, as the kakar does, can be accused 
of being a coward. As for being an unreliable informant I know 
of no better friend that a man who shoots on foot can have in a 
jungle than a kakar. He is small and defenceless and his 
enemies are many, and if in a beat he barks at a python or at a 
pine-marten, when he is expected to bark only at a tiger, he is 
more to be pitied than accused of being unreliable. For to him 
and his kind, these two ruthless enemies are a very real 
menace and he is only carrying out his function— as a watcher 
— when he warns the jungle folk of their presence. 

The kakar has two long canine teeth or tusks on its upper jaw. 
These tusks are very sharp and are the kakar's only means of 
defence, for the points of his short horns are curved inwards 
and are of little use asweapons of defence. Some years ago 
there was a long and inconclusive correspondence in the Indian 
press about a peculiar sound that kakar make on occasions. 

This sound can best be described as a clicking sound, 
resembling that made by the bones used by Christy minstrels. 

It was asserted by some that, as the sound was only heard 
when kakar were running, it was caused by double joints, and 
by others that it was caused by the tusks being clashed 
together in some unexplained way. Both these assertions, and 
others that were advanced, were incorrect. The sound is made 
by the animal's mouth in exactly the same way as all other 
vocal sounds are made, and is used on various occasions: as, 
for instance, when uncertain of a seen object, when disturbed 
by a gun dog, or when pursuing a mate. The alarm call of 
the kakar is a clear ringing bark, resembling that of a medium¬ 
sized dog. 

While the kakar has been crossing the watercourse a large 
flight of insect and fruit-eating birds has approached us from 
our right. In this flight are migrants as well as local 
inhabitants, and if we stand where we are the birds will fly over 
our heads and you will have an opportunity of studying them as 



they perch on the trees and bushes on both sides of the 
watercourse, and also while they are in flight. Birds, except 
when they are very close, are difficult to identify by their 
colours when sitting where they have no background or when 
seen against the sky; but every species of bird can be identified 
while in flight by its shape and by its wing beats. In the flight 
that is approaching us, every member of which is either 
chirping, twittering, or whistling, are two varieties of minivets, 
the short-billed scarlet, and the small orange-breasted. 

Minivets perch on the topmost leaves and twigs of trees and 
bushes, and from these commanding positions keep darting 
into the air to catch winged insects disturbed by their own kind 
or by other members of the flight. With the minivets are: 

Six varieties of tits. The grey, yellow-cheeked, blue-winged, red¬ 
billed, white-eyed, and the common green. 

Four varieties of flycatchers. The white-browed fantail, yellow 
fantail, slaty-headed, and verditer. 

Six varieties of woodpeckers. The golden-backed, black-naped 
green, rufous-bellied pied, pigmy pied, yellow-naped, and the 
scaly-bellied green. 

Four varieties of bulbuls. The golden-fronted green, white¬ 
winged green, white-cheeked crested, and the red-whiskered. 

Three varieties of sunbirds. The Himalayan red, purple, and the 
small green. 

In addition to these birds, which number between two and 
three hundred, there are a pair of black-headed golden orioles 
who are chasing each other from tree to tree, and a lesser 
racket-tailed drongo who, though not as aggressive as his big 
brother, has nevertheless acquired several juicy morsels from 
the flight he is guarding, the last being a fat larva industriously 
dug out of a dry branch by the pigmy pied woodpecker. The 
flight of birds has now flown over our heads and disappeared 
into the jungle on our left, and the only sound to be heard is the 
scratching of the jungle-fowl in the lantanay and the only bird 



to be seen is the crested eagle, patient and hopeful, on the 
topmost branch of the samal tree. 

Beyond the lantana on the right is an open stretch of parklike 
ground, on which grow a number of big plum trees. From this 
direction now comes the alarm bark of a red monkey, followed 
a few seconds later by the excited chattering and barking of 
fifty or more monkeys of varying ages and sizes. A leopard is on 
the move and as he is on more or less open ground it is unlikely 
that he is trying to secure a kill, in which case he is possibly 
making for one or other of the deep ravines in the foothills 
where leopards are often to be found during the hot hours of 
the day. Winding through the plum trees is a path used both by 
human beings and by animals. This path crosses our 
watercourse two hundred yards farther on and as there is a 
good chance, I would almost say a certainty, of the leopard 
coming along the path, let us hurry forward for a hundred and 
fifty yards and sit down with our backs against the high bank 
on the left. The watercourse here is fifty yards wide and on the 
trees on the left-hand side is a large troupe of langurs. The 
warning given by the red monkeys has been heeded, and all the 
mothers in the troupe have got hold of their young ones, and all 
eyes are turned in the direction from which the warning came. 

There is no need for you to keep your eyes on the path, for the 
young langur who is sitting out on the extreme end of a branch 
on the tree nearest the path will give us warning of the 
leopard's approach. Langurs act differently from red monkeys 
on seeing a leopard. This may be due to better organization, or 
to their being less courageous than their red cousins. All the 
red monkeys in a troupe will chatter and bark at the same time 
on seeing a leopard, and where the jungle is suitable they will 
follow it over the tree-tops for considerable distances. 

The langurs act differently. When the young look-out sees the 
leopard he will give the alarm call of, 'khok, khok, khok', and 
when the leader of the troupe, taking direction from the young 
one, sees the leopard and takes up the call the young one will 
stop. Thereafter only the leader and the oldest female will give 



the alarm call— the female call resembles a sneeze— and no 
attempt will be made to follow the leopard. And now the young 
look-out stands up on all fours, pokes his head forward and 
jerks it from side to side. Yes, he is convinced he can see the 
leopard, so he barks, and one or two hysterical companions 
behind him follow suit. The leader of the troupe now catches 
sight of the dread enemy and barks, and a second later is 
followed by the old female whose alarm call, 'tch', resembles a 
sneeze. The young ones are now silent and confine themsleves 
to bobbing their heads up and down, and making faces. The 
troupe appear to know instinctively that they have nothing to 
fear from the leopard on this spring morning, for if he had been 
hungry and out to kill he would not have walked out on to the 
open watercourse as he has done, but would have crossed 
either higher up or lower down, and approached them unseen. 
Being as agile, and little heavier, the leopard experiences no 
difficulty in catching langurs. But it is different with red 
monkeys, for they retire to the extremities of thin branches, 
where the leopard is afraid to trust his weight. 

With head held high, and the morning sun shining on his 
beautifully marked coat, the leopard is now crossing the fifty 
yards of open ground, paying not the slightest attention to 
the langurs clustered on the trees he is approaching. Once he 
stops, and after looking up and down the watercourse without 
noticing us as we sit motionless with our backs to the bank, he 
continues unhurriedly on his way. Climbing the steep bank he 
disappears from our view, but as long as he is in sight of the 
leader and of the old female they will continue to send their 
warning call into the jungle. 

Let us now examine the tracks of the leopard. The path where 
it crosses the watercourse runs over red clay, trodden hard by 
bare human feet. Over this clay is a coating of fine white dust, 
so the conditions for our purpose are ideal. We will assume that 
we did not see the leopard, and that we have come on the 
tracks by accident. The first thing we note is that the pug 
marks have every appearance of having been newly made, and 



therefore that they are fresh. We get this impression from the 
fact that the pile or nap of the dust where it took the weight of 
the leopard is laid flat and smooth, and that the walls of the 
dust surrounding the pads and toes are clear cut and more or 
less perpendicular. 

Presently under the action of the wind and the rays of the hot 
sun the nap will stand up again and the walls will begin to 
crumble. Ants and other insects will cross the track; dust will 
drift into it; bits of grass and dead leaves will be blown on to, 
or will fall on it; and in time the pug marks will be obliterated. 
There is no hard-and-fast rule by which you can judge the age 
of a track, whether it be the pug marks of a leopard or tiger, or 
the track of a snake or a deer. But by close observation and by 
taking into consideration the position of the track, whether in 
an exposed or in a sheltered spot, the time of day and of night 
when certain insects are on the move, the time at which winds 
normally blow, and the time at which dew begins to fall or to 
drip from the trees, you can make a more or less accurate 
guess when the track was made. In the present case we have 
satisfied ourselves from the appearance of the track that it is 
fresh, but this is not the only interesting point about it. We 
have yet to determine whether the leopard was a male or a 
female, whether it was old or young, and whether it was a big 
or a small animal. The round shape of the pug marks show it 
was a male. The absence of any cracks or creases in the pads, 
the round toes, and compact appearance of the entire pug 
marks show that the leopard was young. With regard to size, 
here again only observation and experience will enable you to 
judge the size of animals by their pug marks, and when you 
have gained this experience you can assess the length of either 
a leopard or a tiger to a possible error of an inch or two. The 
Koals of Mirzapur, when asked the size of a tiger, measure the 
pug mark with a blade of grass and then, laying the blade 
down, measure it with the width of their fingers. How accurate 
their method is I am not in a position to say. For myself I prefer 
to guess the size or length of an animal from the general 



appearance of its pug mark, for whatever method is adopted, it 
can at best be only a guess. 

A little beyond where the path crosses the watercourse there is 
a narrow strip of firm sand, flanked on one side by rocks and 
on the other by a high bank. A herd of cheetal has gone along 
this strip of sand. It is always interesting when in a jungle to 
count the number of animals in a herd, 

whether cheetal or sambhar, and to take note of the individual 
members. This enables you to recognize the herd when you 
next see it and to assess casualties, and, further, it gives you a 
friendly feeling towards the herd as being one that you know. If 
the herd is on open ground it is not difficult to count the stags, 
note the length and shape of their horns, and count the hinds 
and young ones. When, however, only one of the herd is visible 
and the others are in cover, the following method of inducing 
the hidden animals to come out into the open will, nine times 
out often, be found effective. After stalking to within a 
reasonable distance of the deer you can see, lie down behind a 
tree or a bush and give the call of a leopard. All animals can 
pin-point sound, and when the deer is looking in your direction 
project your shoulder a little beyond the bole of the tree, and 
move it slowly up and down once or twice, or shake a few 
leaves of the bush. On seeing the movement the deer will start 
calling; and its companions will leave the cover and range 
themselves on either side of her. I have on occasion got as 
many as fifty cheetal to show themselves in this way to enable 
me to photograph them at leisure. I would like, however, to add 
one word of warning. Never try calling like a leoperd, or any 
other animal, unless you are absolutely certain you have the 
area to yourself, and even then keep a careful look all round. 
The following is my reason for the warning. I heard a leopard 
calling repeatedly one night, and from the intonation of the call 
I concluded it was in distress. Before daylight next morning I 
set off to try to find out, if I could, what was wrong with the 
animal. During the night it had changed its position and I now 
located it on a hill some distance away, where it was still 



calling. Selecting a spot where a game-track led on to an open 
glade, and where I would see the leopard before it saw me, I 
lay down behind a boundary pillar and answered the call. 
Thereafter, for a matter of half an hour or more, call answered 
call. The leopard was coming but it was slow about it and was 
coming very cautiously. Eventually when it was a hundred 
yards away I stopped calling. I was lying flat down with my 
elbows resting on the ground and my chin resting in my hands, 
momentarily expecting the leopard to appear, when I heard the 
swish of leaves behind me and on turning my head, looked 
straight into the muzzle of a rifle. Late the previous evening 
Cassels, Deputy Commissioner of Naini Tal, and Colonel Ward 
had arrived at the forest bungalow and unknown to me had 
shot a leopard cub. During the night the mother had been 
heard calling and at crack of dawn Ward set out on an elephant 
to try to shoot the mother. Dew was on the ground, and the 
mahout was well trained, and he brought his elephant up 
without a sound until only a fringe of trees lay between us. 
Ward could see me, but he was not as young as he had been 
and, further, the early morning light was not too good, and he 
was unable to get the sights of his rifle to bear accurately on 
my shoulders, so he signalled the elephant to go forward. 
Mercifully for all of us, when the elephant cleared the fringe of 
trees and was only ten yards from me, and when the mahout— 
also an old man— was pointing and Ward was leaning down 
and aligning his sights for a second time the elephant released 
a branch it was holding down, and, hearing the sound, I turned 
my head and looked up into the muzzle of a heavy rifle. 

The herd of cheetal whose tracks we are looking at and in 
which we are now interested, went along the strip of sand the 
previous evening. This you can tell from the night insects that 
have crossed the tracks, and from the dew drops that have 
fallen on them from an overhanging tree. The herd may be a 
mile or five miles awav, out on an open glade or hidden in 
cover; even so, we will count the number of animals in the herd 
and this I will show you how to do. We will assume that when 



a cheetal is standing, the distance between its hind- and fore¬ 
hooves is thirty inches. Take a stick and draw a line across the 
sand at right angles to the tracks. Measure thirty inches from 
the line you have drawn, this will be easy for your shoes are ten 
inches long, and draw a second line across the sand parallel to 
the first. Now take your stick and count the number of hoof 
prints between the two lines, marking each print with the point 
of your stick as you do so. The result of your count is, let us say, 
thirty. Divide this number by two and you can 
be reasonably sure that there were fifteen cheetal in the herd 
that passed that way the previous evening. This method of 
counting animals of any species, whether wild or domestic, will 
give accurate results for small numbers, say up to ten, and 
approximate results for greater numbers, provided the 
distance between the hind- and fore-feet is known. In the case 
of small animals such as wild dogs, pigs, and sheep, the 
distance will be less than thirty inches, and in the case of large 
animals such as sambhar and domestic cattle it will be more 
than thirty inches. 

For the information of those who were not with me during the 
years of training for jungle warfare, I should like to assert that 
it is possible to glean a lot of useful information from the 
footprints of human beings in ajungle, whether seen on a road, 
path, or game-track, or in fact anywhere where the footprints 
of men in motion are to be seen. Let us assume, for the sake of 
interest, that we are in enemy country and that we have come 
on a game-track on which there are footprints. From the 
appearance of the footprints, their size, shape, absence or 
presence of nails or sprags, iron shod or plain heels, leather 
soles or rubber, and so on, we conclude that the prints have not 
been made by members of our own force, but by the enemy. 

This point being settled we have to determine when the party 
passed that way, and the number of men in the party. You know 
how to assess the time. To find out the number of men in the 
party we will draw a line across the track, and with the toe of 
one foot on this line take a step of thirty inches, and draw a 



second line across the track. The number of heel marks 
between these two lines will give the number of men in the 
party. There are other interesting things you can learn from the 
footprints, and one of the most important of these is the speed 
at which the party was travelling. When a human being is 
moving at a normal pace his weight is distributed evenly over 
his footprint and his stride is from thirty to thirty-two inches, 
according to his height. As the speed is increased less weight 
falls on the heel and more on the toes, the imprint of the heel 
gets less and the imprint of the toes greater, and the length of 
the stride gets longer. This process of less heel and more toes 
continues to get more apparent until when running at full 
speed little more than the ball ol the foot and the toes come in 
contact with the ground. If the party was a small one, ten or a 
dozen in all, it will be possible to see if any were limping, and 
blood on the track will indicate that one or more were 
wounded. 

If you ever get a flesh wound in the jungles I will show you a 
small and insignificant little plant that will not only cauterize 
but also heal your wound better than anything else that I know. 
The plant, which is found in all jungles, grows to a height of 
twelve inches, and has a daisylike flower on a long slender 
stem. The leaves are fleshy and serrated, like the leaf of a 
chrysanthemum. To use the plant break off a few leaves, rinse 
them in water to wash off the dust— if water is available— and 
then squeeze the leaves between finger and thumb, and pour 
the juice freely into the wound. No further treatment is needed 
and, if the wound is not a deep one, it will heal in a day or two. 
The plant is well named, Brahm Buti, 'God's flower'. 

Many of you were my good comrades in the Indian and Burma 
jungles during the war years and if I worked you hard, because 
time was short, you will long since have forgiven me. And I 
hope you have not forgotten all that we learnt together, as for 
instance: the fruit and flowers it was safe to eat; where to look 
for edible roots and tubers; the best substitutes for tea and 
coffee; what plants, barks, and leaves to use for fever, sores. 



and sore throats; what barks and creepers to use for 
stretchers, and for making ropes to sling heavy equipment and 
guns across streams and ravines; how to avoid getting trench 
feet and prickly heat; how to create fire; how to obtain dry fuel 
in a wet forest; how to kill game without resort to fire-arms; 
how to cook or make a dish of tea without metal utensils; how 
to procure a substitute for salt; how to treat snake bites, 
wounds, and stomach disorders. And, finally, how to keep fit 
and conduct ourselves in the jungles to leave at peace with all 
wildlife. These and many other things you and I, from the 
mountains and plains of India, from the villages and cities of 
the United Kingdom, from the United States of America, from 
Canada, Australia, New Zealand, and from other lands, learned 
together. Not with the object of spending the rest of our days in 
the jungles, but to give us confidence in ourselves and in each 
other, to remove our fears of the unknown, and to show our 
enemies that you were better men than they. But much as we 
learned in those days of good comradeship we only touched the 
fringe of knowledge, for the book of nature has no end as it has 
no beginning. 

We have still much of our spring morning before us, and we 
have now arrived at the foothills where the vegetation differs 
from that on the flat ground we have recently traversed. Here 
there are a number of ficus and plum trees that have attracted 
a variety of fruit-eating birds, the most interesting of which are 
the giant hornbills. Hornbills nest in hollow trees and have the 
unusual habit of sealing the females into the nests. This habit 
throws a heavy burden on the male, for the female moults and 
grows enormously fat during the incubation period and when 
the eggs— usually two— are hatched she is unable to fly, and 
the male has the strenuous task of providing food for the whole 
family. By his ungainly appearance, his enormous beak fitted 
with a sound-box, and his heavy and laboured flight, the 
hornbill gives the impression of having missed the bus of 
evolution. And his habit of sealing up the nest and leaving only 
a small hole through which the female projects the tip of her 



beak to take the food the male brings her, possibly dates back 
to prehistoric days when the bird had more powerful enemies 
than it has today All birds that nest in hollow trees or that 
make holes in trees in which to nest, have common enemies. 
Some of these birds— tits, robins, hoopoes— are quite 
defenceless and the question therefore arises why the hornbill, 
who by reason of its powerful beak is best able to defend itself, 
should be the only one of these many tree-nesting birds to 
consider it necessary to seal up its nest. Another unusual habit 
which the hornbill does not share with any other bird that I 
know of, is its habit of adorning its feathers with pigment. This 
pigment, which is yellow and can be readily wiped off with a 
handkerchief, is carried in a small sack above the tail and is 
laid with the beak on to two broad white bands that extend 
across the width of the wings. Why the hornbill finds it 
necessary to paint these white bands yellow with a pigment 
that washes off every time it rains, I can only attribute to 
camouflage against an enemy, or enemies, that it suffered from 
in bygone days. For the only enemy it occasionally suffers from 
now is a leopard, and against a leopard operating at night 
camouflage is of little avail. 

In addition to the hornbills there are a number of other fruit¬ 
eating birds on the ficus and plum trees. Among these are two 
varieties of green pigeon, the Bengal, and the pintail. Two 
varieties of barbet, the crimson-breasted, and the common 
green. Four varieties of bulbul, the Himalayan black, common 
Bengal, red-whiskered, and white-cheeked. Three varieties of 
paroquets, the rose-ringed, the Alexandrine, and the blossom¬ 
headed. Scratching among the dead leaves and eating the ripe 
fruit dropped by the other birds, are fifty or more white-capped 
laughing thrushes. These thrushes were the last to migrate 
from the high nesting-grounds and will be the first to return to 
them. 

Near the ficus trees is a fire-track, and crossing it is a well- 
worn game-track which runs straight up the hill to a salt-lick 
near which there is a saucer of water fed by a tiny spring. 



Between the salt-lick and the water is an old stump. Here a 
stunted kusum tree stood, in the branches of which poachers 
repeatedly built machans. Shooting over salt-licks and over 
water is prohibited, but poachers are no respecters of game 
laws, and as dismantling the machans had no effect I 
eventually cut the tree down. I have heard it stated that 
carnivora do not kill at salt-licks and water holes. However 
considerate carnrvora may be in other parts of the world, in 
India they certainly have no compunction about killing at salt¬ 
licks. In fact it is at these places that they do most of their 
killing, as you can see from the bones and the horns partly 
eaten by porcupines that you will find in the vicinity of this salt¬ 
lick, and in the vicinity of all salt-licks that are surrounded by 
forests in which deer and monkeys live. 

Let us now climb the hill above the salt-lick to a point from 
where we can get a bird's eye view of the foothills and the 
forests that lie at their feet. Before us stretches the forest 
through which we have just come to our starting-point, the 
canal. This forest is as nature made it, for it has little timber of 
commercial value and has, therefore, escaped the devastating 
hand of man. The light green patches in the foreground 
are shishamsaplings which have grown from seeds washed 
down from the foothills by monsoon floods. Later, when these 
saplings grow to maturity, they will provide the best timber for 
cart wheels, and for furniture. The dark-green patches with 
clusters of red berries are runi trees, which provide the powder 
known to commerce as kamala. When the poor people who 
migrate in winter from the high hills to the foothills in search of 
food and warmth— as do the birds— can spare a day from their 
regular labours, old and young resort to the jungles to 
collect kamala. Kamala is a red powder which adheres to 
the runi berry, and the method of collection is to cut down the 
branches, strip the berries into big shallow baskets, and then 
with the hand rub the berries against the sides of the basket. 
The powder when freed from the berries drifts through the 
cracks in the basket and is caught on a cheetal skin, or square 



of cloth. A family of five— a man and his wife and three 
children— working from sunrise to sunset can, when the crop 
is plentiful, collect four pounds of powder worth from one to 
two rupees, according to the market price. The powder is used 
in India and the Middle East for dyeing wool, and until 
dishonest middlemen started adulterating kamala with brick 
dust, it was extensively used in the United States for colouring 
butter. The powder is also used for medicinal purposes, and 
mustard oil in which runi berries have been boiled is used for 
rheumatism. 

Interspersed with the shisham saplings and runi trees, are 
feathery-leaved khair trees. These khair trees in addition to 
providing the foothill villages with plowshares, provide a 
cottage industry for tens of thousands of poor people in the 
United Provinces. The industry, which is a winter one and is 
carried on day and night for a period of four months, produces 
a commodity known locally as kach, and to commerce as 
catechu. It also produces— as a by-product— the dye known as 
khaki, used for dyeing cloth and fishing nets. A friend of mine, 
a man by the name of Mirza, was, I believe, the first to discover 
khaki dye, and the discovery was accidental. Mirza was one day 
leaning over an iron pan in which khair chips were being 
boiled, to make kach, when a white handkerchief he was 
carrying fell into the pan. Fishing the handkerchief out with a 
stick Mirza sent it to the wash. When the handkerchief was 
brought back Mirza found it had not lost any of its colour, so, 
reprimanding the washerman, he told hirn to take it away and 
clean it. Returning with the handkerchief the washerman said 
he had tried every method known to his trade of removing 
stains, but he could not take the colour out of the small square 
of linen. It was thus that Mirza found he had discovered a fast 
dye, which is now produced in the flourishing factory he 
erected at Izattnagar. 

Mingled with the many shades of green— for each tree has its 
own individual colour— are vivid splashes of orange, gold, lilac, 
pink, and red. The trees with orange coloured flowers 



are dhank (Butea Giondosa) which produces a ruby-coloured 
gum used for dyeing silk of the finest quality The trees with the 
three-foot-long showers of golden bloom are amaltas (Cassia 
Fistula). The two-foot-long cylindrical seedpods of this tree 
contain a sweet jelly like substance which is used throughout 
Kumaon as a laxative. The trees with the big lilac coloured 
flowers arc kachanar (Bauhinia). The pink are kusum trees and 
the mass of pink shading from delicate shell to deep rose, are 
not flowers but tender young leaves. The red are samal (silk 
cotton) trees the flowers of which are loved by all birds that 
drink nectar, and by paroquets and monkeys that eat the fleshy 
flowers, and by deer and pigs that eat them when they fall to 
the ground. Later in the year the samal flowers will give way to 
large woody seedpods. When the hot winds blow in April these 
pods will explode like antiaircraft shells and a white cloud of 
silk cotton (kapoc used in life-belts), each section carrying a 
seed, will drift away in the wind to regenerate nature's garden. 
All seeds that are not carried from one place to another by 
birds or animals are provided with buoyant material or with 
parchment sails or propellers, to enable the winds of heaven to 
carry them from place to place. There are, of course, 
exceptions, one of which is the gotail which bears a fruit like a 
small green apple and which no bird or animal eats. This tree 
grows on the banks of rivers and the water does for its seeds 
what birds and animals, and the wind, do for other seeds. 
Another is the coconut, which is provided with a husk that 
enables it to float and be carried by the ocean waves from 
shore to shore. 

Beyond the canal, our starting-point, is our village. The vivid 
green and gold patches show where the young wheat is 
sprouting, and where the mustard crop is in full flower. The 
white line at the foot of the village is the boundary wall, which 
took ten years to build, and beyond the wall the forest 
stretches in an unbroken line until it merges into the horizon. 

To the east and to the west as far as the eye can see is limitless 
forest, and behind us the hills rise ridge upon ridge to the 



eternal snows. 


Here as we sit in this beautiful and peaceful spot in the shadow 
of the mighty Himalayas, with the forest round us putting on a 
new mantle of spring, with every current of wind bringing with 
it the sweet smell of flowers, and with the air throbbing with 
the joyful songs of a great multitude of birds, we can forget for 
a spell the strains and stresses of our world, and savour the 
world of the jungle folk. For here the law of the jungle prevails. 
The law that is older and infinitely better than man-made laws. 
The law that permits each individual to live his own life, and 
that anticipates no troubles or sorrows for the mororw. 

Dangers there are for all, but those dangers only add zest to 
life, and while keeping every individual alert and on its toes, 
take nothing from the joy of living. And that there is joy all 
round you, who can now pin-point sound, recognize every bird 
and animal from its call, and assign a reason for the call, have 
ample proof. Away to our left a peacock is screaming his 
mating call and from that call you know he is dancing, with tail- 
feathers spread, to impress a bevy of admiring hens. Nearer at 
hand a jungle-cock is crowing defiance to all and sundry and is 
being answered by others of his kind who are equally defiant. 
But of fights there are few, for to fight in the jungle exposes the 
contestants to danger. Away to our right a sambhar stag is 
warning the jungle folk that the leopard we saw an hour ago is 
lying out on an exposed spot basking in the sun. The stag will 
bell until the leopard retires for the day into heavy cover, 
where he will be screened from the prying eyes of informants. 

In a thicket below us twenty or more white-eyed tits, white¬ 
winged bulbuls, and grey headed flycatchers, have found a 
spotted owlet dozing in a leafy bower and are calling to 
companions to come and see what they have found. They know 
it is safe to approach and scream into the wise one's very ears, 
for only when he has young will he occasionally kill in daylight. 
And the owlet on his part knows that no matter how much he is 
feared and hated by his tormentors, he has nothing to fear from 
them, and that when they tire of their sport they will leave him 



to his sleep. In the air all round there is sound, and each sound 
has a meaning. The liquid notes, the most beautiful of all the 
songs to be heard in our jungles, is a shama wooing a bashful 
mate. The tap-tap-tapping is a golden-backed woodpecker 
making a hole in a dead tree for his new home. The harsh 
braying is a cheetal stag challenging a rival to battle. High in 
the heavens a serpent eagle is screaming, and higher still a 
flight of vultures are patiently quartering the sky. Yesterday, 
first a Himalyan blue magpie, and then a pair of crows, showed 
the vultures where a tiger had hidden his kill in a thicket near 
where the peacock is now dancing, and today as they circle and 
soar they are hoping for the same good fortune. 

As you sit here, alone or in company with a friend, you can 
realize to the full what your knowledge of jungle lore means to 
you, and how greatly that knowledge has added to your 
confidence and to your pleasure. No longer does the jungle 
hold any terrors for you, for you know there is nothing for you 
to be afraid of. If the necessity arose you could live on the 
jungles, and you could lie down whereever you were and sleep 
without any feeling of unease. You have learnt to maintain 
direction, to be conscious at all times of wind direction, and 
you will never again lose yourself in the jungle no matter 
whether you move by night or by day. Hard though it was at 
first to train your eyes, you know now that your field of vision is 
180 degrees and that every movement in that field will be seen 
by you. You can enter into the lives of all the jungle folk, for you 
have learnt their language; and being able to locate sound, you 
can follow their every movement. You can now move silently, 
and shoot accurately, and if the necessity ever arose again for 
you to face an enemy in the jungles you would not face him 
with an inferiority complex, but with the lull knowledge that no 
matter what his reputation you are a better-trained man than 
he is, and have nothing to learn or to fear from him. 

It is now time to wend our way home, for we have a long way to 
go, and Maggie will be waiting breakfast for us. We will return 
the way we came and as we pass the strip of sand on which we 



counted the cheetaltracks, the path by which the leopard 
crossed the watercourse, the fine silt washed down from the 
foothills, and the passage-way under the aqueduct, we will drag 
a branch behind us. This we will do to obliterate our tracks, 
and all the tracks we saw this morning so that when we visit 
the jungle again tomorrow, the next clay, or maybe the day 
after, we will know that all the tracks we see date from the time 
we last passed that way 



Chapter Twelve 

WHILE ABSORBING JUNGLE LORE IT is possible to develop a 
sense that has been handed down to us from the days of 
primitive man and which, for want of a better name, I shall call. 
Jungle Sensitiveness. This sense, which can be acquired only by 
living in the jungles in close association with wild life, is the 
development of the subconscious warning of danger. 

Many individuals can testify to having avoided trouble by 
acting on an impulse that came how they knew not, and that 
warned their subconscious being against an impending danger. 
In one case the warning may have been against proceeding 
along a certain street in which a moment later a bomb 
exploded; in another, moving just in time from the vicinity of a 
building wrecked a second later by a shell; or in yet another, 
strpping away from the shelter of a tree which a moment later 
was struck by lightning. 

Whatever the danger may have been that the impulse enabled 
the individual to avoid, it was a known and 
an anticipated danger. In the story of the Chowgarh man-eater 
I have given two instances of subconscious warning. At the 
time the warning was conveyed to me the whole of my 
attention was concentrated on avoiding being killed by the 
man-eater, and the warning I received that danger of an attack 
from a man-eater threatened— in the one case from a piled-up 
heap of rocks, and in the other from an overhanging rock under 
which I had to pass— was therefore quite natural and 
understandable. I should now like to give one instance 
of unconscious warning of unsuspected danger, which I can 
only explain as resulting from highly developed jungle 
sensitiveness. 

It was my custom during the winter months at Kaladhungi to 
shoot an occasional sambbar or cheetal stag for the tenants of 
our village. One afternoon a deputation arrived to remind me 
that I had shot no meat for some time, and to request me to 
shoot a cheetal to celebrate a local festival on the morrow. The 



jungles were very dry at the time, making stalking difficult, and 
the sun had set before I found and shot the stag I was looking 
for. Deciding that it was too late to bring in the deer that night 
I covered it up to give it a measure of protection against 
leopard, bear and pig and made for home, intending to return 
with a carrying party early next morning. 

My shot had been heard in the village and I found ten or a 
dozen men waiting for me on the steps of our cottage, equipped 
with ropes and a stout bamboo pole. In reply to their questions 
I told them I had shot the deer they wanted, and added that if 
they met me at the village gate at sunrise next morning I would 
take them to where I had covered it up. The men had come 
prepared to bring in the deer that night and they said that if I 
would tell them where the dear was they would go out and try 
to find it for themselves. On the previous occasions on which I 
had shot deer for the village, I had laid a trail. The men knew 
the jungles as well as I did and all the information they needed, 
when I shot meat for them, was the position of the mark I had 
made on fire-track, game-path, or cattle-track, and from this 
mark they would follow the trail I had laid. This system of 
recovering an animal had never failed, but on the present 
occasion, having shot the deer late in the evening and there 
being no moon, I had not laid a trail. The men were anxious to 
divide up the deer that night in preparation for the feast on the 
morrow, and as I did not wish to disappoint them I told them to 
go up the Powalgarh fire-track for two and a half miles and 
wait for me at the foot of an old haldu tree that was a landmark 
known to all of us. So while the men streamed out of the 
compound I sat down to a cup of tea Maggie had brewed for 
me. 

A man walking alone can cover the ground much faster than a 
body of men walking in Indian file, so I did not hurry over my 
tea, and when I picked up my rifle to follow the men it was 
quite dark. I had walked a good few miles between sunrise and 
sunset that day but being as fit as man could be an additional 
five or six miles meant nothing to me. The men had a good start 



but they were still some distance from the haldu tree when I 
caught them up. I had no difficulty in finding the deer, and 
when the men had lashed it to the bamboo pole I took them 
back by a short cut which reduced the distance by half a mile. 

It was dinner-time when I got back to our cottage, and telling 
Maggie I would postpone my bath until bedtime, I asked her to 
call for dinner while I had a wash. 

When undressing to have my bath that night I was very 
surprised to find that my light rubber-soled shoes were full of 
red dust, and that my feet were coated with it. I am very 
careful of my feet and have in consequence never suffered from 
any form of foot trouble, and I could not understand how I had 
been so careless as to get my feet all messed up. Small things 
have a habit of nagging at the memory and the memory in turn 
nags at the nerves that control the cells in which information is 
stored, and then, suddenly and without any conscious effort on 
our part the information we are seeking— be it the name of a 
person, or of a place, or as in the present case the reason for 
my messed-up feet— is presented to us. 

The old trunk road which carried all the traffic to the hills 
before the railway to Kathgodam was built, runs in a straight 
line from our gate to the Boar bridge. Three hundred yards 
beyond the bridge the road turns to the left. On the right-hand 
side of this turn the road, at the time I am writing of, was met 
by the Powalgarh fire-track which for a few hundred yards 
followed the alignment of the present Powalgarh motor road. 
Fifty yards from the Boar bridge the trunk road is met on the 
right by the Kota road coming down from the north. Between 
the junction of these two roads and the turn, the road runs 
through a shallow depression. Heavy cart traffic had churned 
up the red earth in the depression, resulting in the road at this 
point being six inches deep in dust. To avoid walking in the 
dust the foot traffic had trodden a narrow path between the 
dusty road and the jungle on the left. Thirty yards on the near 
side of the turn, the road and the narrow footpath ran over a 
small culvert which had parapet walls a foot thick and eighteen 



inches high, to prevent carts running off the road. The culvert 
had ceased to function many years previously and at the lower 
end of it, i.e. the end nearer the narrow footpath, there was a 
bed of sand eight or ten feet sguare on a level with the road. 

The information concerning my dirty feet that had been 
brought back to memory was, that when following my men 
after tea I had left the narrow footpath a few yards on the near 
side of the culvert; crossed the road from left to right through 
the six-inch-deep dust; skirted along the right-hand edge of the 
road and after passing over the culvert, recrossed the road, 
and continued along the footpath. Why had I done this? From 
the time I left our cottage, to the time I overtook the men near 
the haldu tree, I had not heard a single sound that had given 
me even the suspicion of uneasiness, and I had seen nothing, 
for it was a dark night. Why then had I crossed the road, and 
after passing over the culvert, recrossed it? 

I have stated earlier in this book that from the day I traced the 
terrifying sound made by Dansay's banshee as the friction of 
two smooth surfaces, I have made a hobby of finding a reason 
for every unusual thing I have heard or seen in the jungles. 
Well, here was something unusual, something that needed an 
explanation, so before there was any traffic on the road next 
morning I went out to try to get the explanation. 

The men after leaving our gate the previous evening had gone 
down the road in a bunch and had been joined at the village 
gate by an additional three men, bringing the number to 
fourteen. 

After crossing the Boar bridge the party had proceeded along 
the footpath in Indian file, crossed the culvert, and at the turn 
crossed from the left to the right of the road, and gone up the 
fire-track. Shortly thereafter, a tiger came down the Kota road, 
scratched up the ground near a bush at the junction of the two 
roads, crossed the trunk road, and proceeded along the 
footpath. Here the tiger's pug marks were superimposed on the 
footprints of my men. When the tiger had proceeded along the 



footpath for about thirty yards, I came over the bridge. 

The bridge is an iron one and quite evidently the tiger heard 
me crossing it, for I was walking fast and making no attempt to 
go silently When the tiger found I was not going up the Kota 
road, but was coming in his direction, he hurried down the 
footpath and, leaving it at the culvert, lay down on the patch of 
sand facing the road and with his head a yard from the 
footpath. I followed the tiger down the footpath and when I was 
within five yards of the culvert I turned to the right, crossed 
the road through the six-inch-deep dust, skirted along the right 
edge of the road, and after passing over the culvert recrossed 
the road to the footpath. And this I had done unconsciously, to 
avoid passing within a yard of the tiger. 

I believe that if I had continued along the footpath I could have 
passed the tiger with perfect safety provided (a) that I had 
proceeded steadily on my way, (b) that I had made no vocal 
sound, (c) that I had made no violent movement. The tiger had 
no intention of killing me, but if at the moment of passing him I 
had stopped to listen to any jungle sound, or had coughed or 
fanned or blown my nose, or had thrown the rifle from one 
shoulder to the other, there was a chance that the tiger would 
have got nervous and attacked me. My subconscious being was 
not prepared to take this risk and jungle sensitiveness came to 
my assistance and guided me away from the potential danger. 

On how many occasions jungle sensitiveness has enabled me to 
avoid dangers of one kind or another it is not possible for me to 
say, but from the fact that in all the years I have lived in the 
jungles I have only once come in actual contact with a wild 
animal is proof that some sense, call it jungle sensitiveness, or 
call it my Guardian Angel, has intervened at the critical 
moment to ensure my safety. 


-END- 