BOOK THRF.F.: 

THE MAN-FATTNO 

LEOPARD 
OF RUDRAPRAYAO 






The Pilgrim Road 

IF YOU ARE A HINDU FROM the sun-scorched plains of India 
and you desire— as all good Hindus do— to perform the 
pilgrimage to the age-old shrines of Kedarnath and Badrinath, 
you must start on your pilgrimage from Hardwar and, in order 
to acquire a full measure of the merits vouch-safed to you for 
the correct performance of the pilgrimage, you must walk 
every step of the way from Hardwar to Kedarnath and, thence, 
over the mountain track to Badrinath, barefoot. 

Having purified yourself by immersion in the sacred Har-ki- 
pauri pool, done darshan at the many shrines and temples in 
Hardwar, and added your mite to their coffers, you must not 
omit to toss a coin within reach of the festering stumps— which 
once were hands— of the lepers who line the narrowest part of 
the pilgrim road above the sacred pool, for if you make this 
omission, they will call down curses on your head. What matter 
if these unfortunate ones have wealth beyond your dreams 
secreted in their filthy rags, or in the rock caves they call their 
homes? The curses of such as they were best avoided, and 
immunity will cost you but a few coppers. 

You have now done all that custom and religion require of a 
good Hindu and are at liberty to start on your long and hard 
pilgrimage. 

The first place of interest you will come to after leaving 
Hardwar is Rishikesh. Here you will make your first 
acquaintance with the Kalakamli Wallahas, so called because of 
the black blanket their founder wore— and which many of his 
disciples still wear— in the form of a habit or loose cloak bound 
round the middle with a cord of goat's hair; and who are 
renowned throughout the land for their good deeds. I do not 
know if any of the other religious brotherhoods you will meet 
on your pilgrimage have any claim to renown, but I do know 
that the Kalakamli Wallahas have such a claim, and justly so, 
for out of the offerings they receive at their many shrines and 
temples, they have built— and they maintain— hospitals. 



dispensaries, and pilgrim shelters, and they feed the poor and 
the needy. 

With Rishikesh behind you, you will come next to Lachman 
Jhula, where the pilgrim road crosses from the right to the left 
bank of the Ganges on a suspension bridge. Here beware of the 
red monkeys who infest the bridge, for they are even more 
importunate than the lepers of Hardwar, and if you omit to 
propitiate them with offerings of sweets, or parched gram, your 
passage across the long and narrow bridge is likely to be both 
difficult and painful. 

Three-day's journey up the left bank of the Ganges and you 
have reached the ancient capital of Garhwal— Shreenagar— an 
historic, religious, and trading centre of considerable 
importance and of great beauty, nestling in a wide, open valley 
surrounded by high mountains. It was here, in the year 1805, 
that the forebears of the Garhwali soldiers who have fought so 
gallantly in two world wars made their last, and unsuccessful, 
stand against the Gurkha invaders, and it is a matter of great 
regret to the people of Garhwal that their ancient city of 
Shreenagar, together with the palaces of their kings, was swept 
away, to the last stone, by the bursting of the Gohna Lake dam 
in 1894. This dam, caused by a landslide in the valley of the 
Birehi Ganga, a tributary of the Ganges, was 11,000 feet wide 
at the base, 2,000 feet wide at the summit, and 900 feet high 
and, when it burst, ten billion cubic feet of water were released 
in the short space of six hours. So well was the bursting of the 
dam timed that though the flood devastated the valley of the 
Ganges right down to Hardwar and swept away every bridge, 
only one family was lost, the members of which had returned to 
the danger-zone after having been forcibly removed from it. 

From Shreenagar you have to face a stiff climb to Chatikhal, 
which is compensated for by the magnificent views you will get 
of the Ganges valley and of the eternal snows above Kedarnath. 

A day's march from Chatikhal and you see in front of you 
Golabrai with its row of grass-thatched pilgrim shelters, a one- 



roomed stone-built house, and its drinking trough. This big and 
imposing drinking trough is fed by a tiny crystal-clear stream 
which, in summer, is sedately conducted down the mountain¬ 
side by a series of channels rough-hewn from pine saplings. At 
other seasons of the year the water cascades unconfined and 
merrily over rocks draped with moss and maidenhair fern, 
through luxuriant beds of vivid green watercress and sky-blue 
strobilanthes. 

A hundred yards beyond the pilgrim shelters, and on the right- 
hand side of the road, stands a mango tree. This tree and the 
two-storied house above it which is the home of the pundit, 
who owns the Golabrai pilgrim shelters, are worthy of note, for 
they play an important part in the tale I have to tell. 

Another two miles, along the last flat bit of ground you will see 
for many a day, and you have reached Rudraprayag, where you 
and I, my pilgrim friend, must part, for your way lies across the 
Alaknanda and up the left bank of the Mandakini to Kedarnath, 
while mine lies over the mountains to my home in Naini Tal. 

The road in front of you, which has been trodden by the feet of 
millions of pilgrims like you, is excessively steep and incredibly 
rough; and you, whose lungs have never breathed air above sea 
level, who have never climbed anything higher than the roof of 
your house, and whose feet have never trodden anything 
harder than yielding sand, will suffer greatly. Times there will 
be, a-many, when, gasping for breath, you toil up the face of 
steep mountains on feet torn and bleeding by passage over 
rough rocks, sharp shale, and frozen ground, when you will 
question whether the prospective reward you seek is worth the 
present price you pay in suffering; but being a good Hindu you 
will toil on, comforting yourself with the thought that merit is 
not gained without suffering, and the greater the suffering in 
this world, the greater the reward in the next. 



The Man-Eater 

'PRAYAG' IS THE HINDI WORD FOR 'confluence'. At 
Rudraprayag, two rivers— the Mandakini coming down from 
Kedarnath, and the Alaknanda from Badrinath— meet, and 
from here onwards the combined waters of the two rivers 
are known to all Hindus as Ganga Mai, and to the rest of the 
world as the Ganges. [The author is mistaken; the river 
continues as Alaknanda upto Devaprayag, where it becomes 
the Ganges on meeting the Bhagirathi.] 

When an animal, be it a leopard or be it a tiger, becomes a 
man-eater, it is given a place-name for purposes of 
identification. The name so given to a man-eater does not 
necessarily imply that the animal began its man-eating career 
at, or that all its kills were confined to, that particular place. It 
is quite natural that the leopard which started its man-eating 
career at a small village twelve miles from Rudraprayag, on the 
Kedarnath pilgrim route, should have been known for the rest 
of its career as the Man-eating Leopard of Rudraprayag. 

Leopards do not become man-eaters for the same reasons that 
tigers do. Though I hate to admit it, our leopards— the most 
beautiful and the most graceful of all the animals in our 
jungles, and who when cornered or wounded are second to 
none in courage— are scavengers to the extent that they will, 
when driven by hunger, eat any dead thing they find in the 
jungle, just as lions will in the African bush. 

The people of Garhwal are Hindus, and as such cremate their 
dead. The cremation invariably takes place on the bank of a 
stream or river in order that the ashes may be washed down 
into the Ganges and eventually into the sea. As most of the 
villages are situated high up on the hills, while the streams of 
rivers are in many cases miles away down in the valleys, it will 
be realized that a funeral entails a considerable tax on the 
manpower of a small community when, in addition to the 
carrying party, labour has to be provided to collect and carry 
the fuel needed for the cremation. In normal times these rites 



are carried out very effectively; but when disease in epidemic 
form sweeps through the hills, and the inhabitants die faster 
than they can be disposed of, a very simple rite, which consists 
of placing a live coal in the mouth of the deceased, is 
performed in the village, and the body is then carried to the 
edge of the hill and cast into the valley below. 

A leopard, in an area in which his natural food is scarce, 
finding these bodies, very soon acquires a taste for human 
flesh, and when the disease dies down and normal conditions 
are re-established, he, very naturally, on finding his food-supply 
cut off, takes to killing human beings. In the wave of epidemic 
influenza that swept through the country in 1918 and that cost 
India over a million lives, Garhwal suffered very severely, and it 
was at the end of this epidemic that the Garhwal man-eater 
made his appearance. 

The first human kill credited to the man-eating leopard of 
Rudraprayag is recorded as having taken place at Bainji village 
on 9 June 1918, and the last kill for which the man-eater was 
responsible took place at Bhainswara village on 14 April 1926. 
Between these two dates the number of human kills recorded 
by Government was one hundred and twenty-five. 

While I do not think that this figure, of one hundred and 
twenty-five, is our to the extent claimed by Government 
officials who served in Garhwal at that time and by residents in 
the area in which the man-eater was operating, I do know that 
the figure given is not correct, for some kills which took place 
while I was on the ground have not been shown in the records. 

In crediting the man-eater with fewer kills than he was actually 
responsible for, I do not wish to minimize in any way the 
sufferings endured by the people of Garhwal for eight long 
years, nor do I wish to detract in any way from the reputation 
of the animals which the people of Garhwal claim as having 
been the most famous man-eating leopard of all time. 

However, be the number of human kills what they may. 



Garhwal can claim that this leopard was the most publicized 
animal that has ever lived, for he was mentioned— to my 
knowledge— in the press of the United Kingdom, America, 
Canada, South Africa, Kenya, Malaya, Hong Kong, Australia, 
New Zealand, and in most of the dailies and weeklies in India. 

In addition to this newspaper publicity, tales of the man-eater 
were carried to every part of India by the sixty thousand 
pilgrims who annually visit the shrines of Kedarnath and 
Badrinath. 

The procedure laid down by Government in all cases of human 
beings alleged to have been killed by man-eaters is for the 
relatives or friends of the deceased to lodge a report with the 
village patwari as soon after the occurrence as possible. On 
receipt of the report the patwari proceeds to the spot, and if 
the body of the victim has not been found before his arrival he 
organizes a search party, and with their aid endeavours to find 
the victim. If the body has been found before his arrival, or if 
the search party finds it, the patwari holds an inquiry on the 
spot and when satisfied that it is a genuine kill by a man-eater, 
and not a case of murder, he gives the relatives permission to 
remove the remains for cremation or for burial, according to 
the caste or creed of the victim. The kill is duly recorded in his 
register against the man-eater operating in that area, and a full 
report of occurrence is submitted to the administrative head of 
the district— the Deputy Commissioner— who also keeps a 
register in which all the man-eater's kills are recorded. In the 
event, however, of the body, or any portion of it, not being 
found— as sometimes happens, for man-eaters have an 
annoying habit of carrying their victims for long distances— the 
case is held over for further inquiry, and the man-eater is not 
credited with the kill. Again, when people are mauled by a 
man-eater and subsequently die from their injuries, the man- 
eater concerned is not credited with their deaths. 

It will thus be seen that though the system adopted for 
recording the kills of man-eaters is as good as it can be, it is 



possible for one of these abnormal animals to be responsible 
for more human kills than he is finally credited with, especially 
when his operations extend over a long period of years. 



Terror 

THE WORD 'TERROR' IS SO generally and universally used in 
connection with everyday trivial matters that it is apt to fail to 
convey when intended to do so, its real meaning. I should like 
therefore to give you some idea of what terror— real terror- 
meant to the fifty thousand inhabitants living in the five 
hundred square miles of Garhwal in which the man-eater was 
operating, and to the sixty thousand pilgrims who annually 
passed through that area between the years 1918 and 1926. 
And I will give you a few instances to show you what grounds 
the inhabitants, and the pilgrims, had for that terror. 

No curfew order has ever been more strictly enforced, and 
more implicitly obeyed, than the curfew imposed by the man- 
eating leopard of Rudraprayag. 

During the hours of sunlight life in that area carried on in a 
normal way. Men went long distances to the bazaars to transact 
business, or to outlying villages to visit relatives or friends; 
women went up the mountainsides to cut grass for thatching or 
for cattle-fodder; children went to school or into the jungles to 
graze goats or to collect dry sticks, and, if it was summer, 
pilgrims, either singly or in large numbers, toiled along the 
pilgrim routes on their way to and from the sacred shrines of 
Kedarnath and Badrinath. 

As the sun approached the western horizon and the shadows 
lengthened, the behaviour of the entire population of the area 
underwent a very sudden and a very noticeable change. Men 
who had sauntered to the bazaars or to outlying villages were 
hurrying home; women carrying great bundles of grass were 
stumbling down the steep mountain-sides; children who had 
loitered on their way from school, or who were late in bringing 
in their flocks of goats or the dry sticks they had been sent out 
to collect, were being called by anxious mothers, and the weary 
pilgrims were being urged by any local inhabitant who passed 
them to hurry to shelter. 



When night came, an ominous silence brooded over the whole 
area— no movement and no sound anywhere. The entire local 
population was behind fast-closed doors and, in many cases, 
had sought further protection by building additional doors. 
Those of the pilgrims who had not been fortunate enough to 
find accommodation inside houses were huddled close together 
in pilgrim shelters. And all, whether in house or shelter, were 
silent for fear of attracting the dread man-eater. 

This is what terror meant to the people of Garhwal, and to the 
pilgrims, for eight long years. 

I will now give a few instances to show you what grounds there 
were for that terror. 

A boy, an orphan aged fourteen, was employed to look after a 
flock of forty goats. He was of the depressed— untouchable- 
class, and each evening when he returned with his charges he 
was given his food and then shut into a small room with the 
goats. The room was on the ground floor of a long row of 
double-storied buildings and was immediately below the room 
occupied by the boy's master, the owner of the goats. To 
prevent the goats crowding in on him as he slept, the boy had 
fenced off the far left-hand corner of the room. 

This room had no windows and only one door, and when the 
boy and the goats were safely inside, the boy's master pulled 
the door to, and fastened it by passing the hasp, which was 
attached by a short length of chain to the door, over the staple 
fixed in the lintel. A piece of wood was then inserted in the 
staple to keep the hasp in place, and on his side of the door the 
boy, for his better safety, rolled a stone against it. 

On the night the orphan was gathered to his fathers; his master 
asserts the door was fastened as usual, and I have no reason to 
question the truth of his assertion. In support of it, the door 
showed many deep claw-marks, and it is possible that in his 
attempts to claw open the door the leopard displaced the piece 
of wood that was keeping the hasp in place, after which it 



would have been easy for him to push the stone aside and enter 
the room. 


Forty goats packed into a small room, one corner of which was 
fenced off, could not have left the intruder much space to 
manoeuvre in, and it is left to conjecture whether the leopard 
covered the distance from the door to the boy's corner of the 
room over the backs of the goats or under their bellies, for at 
this stage of the proceedings all the goats must have been on 
their feet. 

It were best to assume that the boy slept through all the noise 
the leopard must have made when trying to force open the 
door, and that the goats must have made when the leopard had 
entered the room, and that he did not cry for help to deaf ears, 
only screened from him and the danger that menaced him by a 
thin plank. 

After killing the boy in the fenced-off corner, the leopard 
carried him across the empty room— the goats had escaped 
into the night— down a steep hillside, and then over some 
terraced fields to a deep boulder-strewn ravine. It was here, 
after the sun had been up a few hours, that the master found 
all that the leopard had left of his servant. 

Incredible as it may seem, not one of the forty goats had 
received so much as a scratch. 

A neighbour had dropped in to spend the period of a long 
smoke with a friend. The room was L-shaped and the only door 
in it was not visible from where the two men sat on the floor 
with their backs to the wall, smoking. The door was shut but 
not fastened, for up to that night there had been no human kills 
in the village. 

The room was in darkness and the owner of it had just passed 
the hookah to his friend when it fell to the ground, scattering a 
shower of burning charcoal and tobacco. Telling his friend to be 
more careful or he would set the blanket on which they were 
sitting on fire, the man bent forward to gather up the embers 



and, as he did so, the door came into view. A young moon was 
near setting and, silhouetted against it, the man saw a leopard 
carrying his friend through the door. 

When recounting the incident to me a few days later the man 
said: 'I am speaking the truth, sahib, when I tell you I never 
heard even so much as the intake of a breath, or any other 
sound, from my friend who was sitting only an arm's-length 
from me, either when the leopard was killing him, or when it 
was carrying him away. There was nothing I could do for my 
friend, so I waited until the leopard had been gone some little 
while, and then I crept up to the door and hastily shut and 
secured it. 1 

The wife of the headman of a village was ill from a fever, and 
two friends had been called in to nurse her. 

There were two rooms in the house. The outer room had two 
doors, one opening on to a small flagged courtyard, and the 
other leading into the inner room. This outer room also had a 
narrow slip of a window set some four feet above floor level, 
and in this window, which was open, stood a large brass vessel 
containing drinking-water for the sick woman. 

Except for the one door giving access to the outer room, the 
inner room had no other opening in any of its four walls. 

The door leading out on to the courtyard was shut and securely 
fastened, and the door between the two rooms was wide open. 

The three women in the inner room were lying on the ground, 
the sick woman in the middle with a friend on either side of 
her. The husband in the outer room was on a bed on the side of 
the room nearest the window, and on the floor beside his bed, 
where its light would shine into the inner room, was a lantern, 
turned down low to conserve oil. 

Round about midnight, when the occupants of both the rooms 
were asleep, the leopard entered by way of the narrow slip of a 
window; avoiding in some miraculous way knocking over the 



brass vessel which nearly filled it, skirted round the man's low 
bed and, entering the inner room, killed the sick woman. It was 
only when the heavy brass vessel crashed to the floor as the 
leopard attempted to lift its victim through the window that the 
sleepers awoke. 

When the lantern had been turned up the woman who had been 
sick was discovered lying huddled up under the window, and in 
her throat were four great teeth-marks. 

A neighbour, whose wife had been one of the nurses on that 
night, when relating the occurrence to me said, 'The woman 
was very ill from her fever and was likely to have died in any 
case, so it was fortunate that the leopard selected her. 1 

Two Gujars were moving their herd of thirty buffaloes from one 
grazing-ground to another, and accompanying them was the 
twelve-year-old daughter of the older of the two men, who were 
brothers. 

They were strangers to the locality and either had not heard of 
the man-eater or, which is more probable, thought the 
buffaloes would give them all the protection they needed. 

Near the road and at an elevation of eight thousand feet was a 
narrow strip of flat ground below which was a sickle-shaped 
terraced field, some quarter of an acre in extent, which had 
long been out of cultivation. The men selected this site for their 
camp and having cut stakes from the jungle which surrounded 
them on all sides, they drove them deep into the field and 
tethered their buffaloes in a long row. 

After the evening meal prepared by the girl had been eaten, the 
party of three laid their blankets on the narrow strip of ground 
between the road and the buffaloes and went to sleep. 

It was a dark night, and some time towards the early hours of 
the morning the men were awakened by the booming of their 
buffalo-bells and by the snorting of the frightened animals. 
Knowing from long experience that these sounds indicated the 



presence of carnivora, the men lit a lantern and went among 
the buffaloes to quieten them, and to see that none had broken 
the ropes tethering them to the stakes. 

The men were absent only a few minutes. When they returned 
to their sleeping-place they found that the girl whom they had 
left asleep was missing. On the blanket on which she had been 
lying were big splashes of blood. 

When daylight came, the father and the uncle followed the 
blood trail. After skirting round the row of tethered buffaloes, it 
went across the narrow field and down the steep hillside for a 
few yards, to where the leopard had eaten his kill. 

'My brother was born under an unlucky star, sahib, for he has 
no son, and he had only this one daughter who was to have 
been married shortly and to whom he looked in the fullness of 
time to provide him with an heir, and now the leopard has come 
and eaten her. 1 

I could go on and on, for there were many kills, and each one 
has its own tragic story, but I think I have said enough to 
convince you that the people of Garhwal had ample reason to 
be terrified of the man-eating leopard of Rudraprayag, 
especially when it is remembered that Garhwalis are intensely 
superstitious and that, added to their fear of physical contact 
with the leopard, was their even greater fear of the 
supernatural, of which I shall give you an example. 

I set out from the small one-roomed Rudraprayag Inspection 
Bungalow one morning just as day was breaking, and as I 
stepped off the veranda I saw in the dust, where the ground 
had been worn away by human feet, the pug-marks of the man- 
eater. 

The pug-marks were perfectly fresh and showed that the 
leopard had stepped out of the veranda only a few minutes in 
advance of me, and from the direction in which they were 
pointing it was evident that the leopard, after his fruitless visit 
to the bungalow, was making for the pilgrim road some fifty 



yards away. 

Tracking between the bungalow and the road was not possible 
owing to the hard surface of the ground, but as I reached the 
gate I saw the pug-marks were heading in the direction of 
Golabrai. A large flock of sheep and goats had gone down the 
road the previous evening, and in the dust they had kicked up 
the leopard's tracks showed up as clearly as they would have 
on fresh-fallen snow. 

I had, by then, become quite familiar with the man-eater's pug- 
marks and could with little difficulty have distinguished them 
from the pug-marks of any hundred leopards. 

A lot can be learnt from the pug-marks of carnivora, as for 
instance the sex, age, and size of the animal. I had examined 
the pug-marks of the man-eater very carefully the first time I 
had seen them, and I knew he was an out-sized male leopard, 
long past his prime. 

As I followed the tracks of the man-eater on this morning I 
could see that he was only a few minutes ahead of me, and that 
he was moving at a slow, even pace. 

The road, which had no traffic on it at this early hour of the 
morning, wound in and out of a number of small ravines, and as 
it was possible that the leopard might on this occasion break 
his rule of never being out after daylight, I crept round each 
corner with the utmost care until I found, a mile farther on, 
where the leopard had left the road and gone up a great track 
into dense scrub and tree jungle. 

A hundred yards from where the leopard left the road there 
was a small field, in the centre of which was a thorn enclosure, 
erected by the owner of the field to encourage packmen to 
camp there and fertilize it. In this enclosure was the flock of 
sheep and goats that had come down the road the previous 
evening. 

The owner of the flock, a rugged fellow who by the looks of him 



had been packing trade commodities up and down the pilgrim 
road for nigh on half a century, was just removing the 
thornbush closing the entrance to the enclosure when I came 
up. In reply to my inquiries be informed me that he had seen 
nothing of the leopard but that, just as dawn was breaking, his 
two sheep-dogs had given tongue and, a few minutes later, a 
kakar had barked in the jungle above the road. 

When I asked the old packman if he would sell me one of his 
goats, he asked for what purpose it was wanted; and when I 
told him it was to tie up for the man-eater, he walked through 
the opening in the fence, replaced the bush, accepted one of 
my cigarettes, and sat down on a rock by the side of the road. 

We remained smoking for a while, with my question still 
unanswered, and then the man began to talk. 

'You, sahib, are undoubtedly he whom I have heard tell of on 
my way down from my village near Badrinath, and it grieves 
me that you should have come all this long way from your home 
on a fruitless errand. The evil spirit that is responsible for all 
the human deaths in this area is not an animal, as you think it 
is, that can be killed by ball or shot, or by any of the other 
means that you have tried and that others have tried before 
you; and in proof of what I say I will tell you a story while I 
smoke this second cigarette. The story was told to me by my 
father, who, as everyone knows, had never been heard to tell a 
lie. 1 

'My father was a young man then, and I unborn, when an evil 
spirit, like the one that is now troubling this land, made its 
appearance in our village, and all said it was a leopard. Men, 
women, and children were killed in their homes and every 
effort was made, as has been made here, to kill the animal. 
Traps were set, and far-famed marksmen sat in trees and fired 
ball and shot at the leopard; and when all these attempts to kill 
it had failed, a great terror seized the people and none dared 
leave the shelter of his home between the hours of sunset and 


sunrise. 



'And then the headmen of my father's village, and of the 
villages round about, bade all the men attend a panchayat, and 
when all were assembled the panch addressed the meeting and 
said they were assembled to devise some fresh means to rid 
themselves of this man-eating leopard. Then an old man, fresh 
back from the burning-ghat, whose grandson had been killed 
the previous night, arose and said it was no leopard that had 
entered his house and killed his grandson as he lay asleep by 
his side, but one from among their own community who, when 
he craved for human flesh and blood, assumed the semblance 
of a leopard, and that such a one could not be killed by the 
methods already tried, as bad been amply proved, and could 
only be killed by fire. His suspicions, he said, fell on the 
fat sadhu who lived in the hut near the ruined temple.' 

'At this there was a great uproar, some exclaiming that the old 
man's sorrow at the loss of his grandson had demented him; 
others averring he was right. And these later recalled that 
the sadhu had arrived at the village at about the time the 
killings had started, and it was further recalled that on the day 
succeeding a killing the sadhu had been wont to sleep all day, 
stretched on his bed in the sun.' 

'When order had been restored the matter was long debated 
and the panchayat eventually decided that no immediate action 
would be taken, but that the sadhu's movements should in 
future be watched. The assembled men were then divided into 
three parties, the first party to start its watch from the night 
the next kill could be expected; for the kills had taken place at 
more or less regular intervals.' 

'During the nights the first and the second parties were on 
watch, the sadhu did not leave his hut.' 

'My father was with the third party, and at nightfall he silently 
took up his position. Soon after, the door of the hut slowly 
opened, and the sadhu emerged and vanished into the night. 
Some hours later an agonized scream came floating down on 
the night air from the direction of a charcoal-burner's hut far 



up the mountain-side, and thereafter there was silence/ 

'No man of my father's party closed an eye that night, and as 
the grey dawn was being born in the east they saw 
the sadhu hurrying home, and his hands and his mouth were 
dripping blood. 1 

'When the sadhu had gone inside his hut and had closed the 
door, the watchers went up to it, and fastened it from the 
outside by passing the chain that was dangling from it over the 
staple in the lintel. Then they went each to his haystack and 
returned with a big bundle of straw, and when the sun rose that 
morning there was nothing but smouldering ash where the hut 
had been. From that day the killing stopped.' 

'Suspicion has not yet fallen on any one of the many sadhus in 
these parts, but when it does the method employed in my 
father's time will be adopted in mine, and until that day comes, 
the people of Garhwal must suffer.' 

'You have asked if I will sell you a goat. I will not sell you a 
goat, sahib, for I have none to spare. But if, after hearing my 
story, you still want an animal to tie up for what you think is a 
man-eating leopard, I will lend you one of my sheep. If it is 
killed you shall pay me its price, and if it is not killed no money 
shall pass between us. Today and tonight I rest here, and 
tomorrow at the rising of the Bhootia star I must be on my way.' 

Near sundown that evening I returned to the thorn enclosure 
and my packman friend very cheerfully let me select from his 
flock a fat sheep which I considered was heavy enough to give 
the leopard two nights' feed. This sheep I tied in the scrub 
jungle close to the path up which the leopard had gone some 
twelve hours earlier. 

Next morning I was up betimes. As I left the bungalow I again 
saw the pug-marks of the man-eater where he had stepped off 
the veranda, and at the gate I found he had come up the road 
from the direction of Golabrai, and, after calling at the 
bungalow, had gone away towards the Rudraprayag bazaar. 



The fact that the leopard was trying to secure a human kill was 
proof that he had no interest in the sheep I had provided for 
him, and I was therefore not surprised to find that he had not 
eaten any portion of the sheep which he had apparently killed 
shortly after I had tied it up. 

'Go back to your home, sahib, and save your time and your 
money,' was the parting advice of the old packman as he 
whistled to his flock, and headed down the road for Hardwar. 

A parallel case, happily without as tragic an ending, occurred a 
few years previously near Rudraprayag. 

Incensed at the killing of their relatives and friends, and 
convinced that a human being was responsible for their deaths, 
an angry crowd of men seized an unfortunate sadhu of Kothgi 
village, Dasjulapatty, but before they were able to wreak their 
vengeance on him Philip Mason, then Deputy Commissioner of 
Garhwal, who was camping in the vicinity, arrived on the scene. 
Seeing the temper of the crowd, and being a man of great 
experience. Mason said he had no doubt that the real culprit 
had been apprehended but that before the sadhu was lynched 
justice demanded that his guilt should be established. To this 
end he suggested that the sadhu should be placed under arrest 
and closely guarded, night and day. To this suggestion the 
crowd agreed, and for seven days and seven nights 
the sadhu was carefully guarded by the police, and as carefully 
watched by the populace. On the eighth morning, when the 
guard and the watchers were being changed, word was 
brought that a house in a village some miles away had been 
broken into the previous night, and a man carried off. 

The populace raised no objection to the sadhu being released 
that day, contenting themselves by saying that on this occasion 
the wrong man had been apprehended, but that next time no 
mistake would be made. 

In Garhwal all kills by man-eaters are attributed to sadhus, and 
in Naini Tal and Almora districts all such kills are attributed to 



the Bokhsars, who dwell in the unhealthy belt of grass at the 
foot of the hills called the Terai, living chiefly on game. 

The sadhus are believed to kill for the lust of human flesh and 
blood, and the Bokhsars are believed to kill for the jewellery 
their victims are wearing, or for other valuables they have on 
their person. More women than men have been killed by man- 
eaters in Naini Tal and Almora districts, but for this there is a 
better reason than the one given. 

I have lived too long in silent places to be imaginative. Even so 
there were times a-many during the months I spent at 
Rudraprayag sitting night after night— on one occasion for 
twenty-eight nights in succession— watching bridges, or cross¬ 
roads, or approaches to villages, or over animal or human kills, 
when I could imagine the man-eater as being a big, light- 
coloured animal— for so he had appeared to me the first time 
that I saw him— with the body of a leopard and the head of a 
fiend. 

A fiend who, while watching me through the long night hours, 
rocked and rolled with silent fiendish laughter at my vain 
attempts to outwit him, and licked his lips in anticipation of the 
time when, finding me off my guard for one brief moment, he 
would get the opportunity he was waiting for, of burying his 
teeth in my throat. 

It may be asked what the Government was doing all the years 
the Rudraprayag man-eater menaced the people of Garhwal. I 
hold no brief for the Government, but after having spent ten 
weeks on the ground, during which time I walked many 
hundreds of miles and visited most of the villages in the 
affected area, I assert that the Government did everything in 
its power to remove the menace. Rewards were offered: the 
local population believed they amounted to ten thousand 
rupees in cash and the gift of two villages, sufficient 
inducement to make each one of the four thousand licensed 
gun-holders of Garhwal a prospective slayer of the man-eater. 
Picked shikaris were employed on liberal wages and were 



promised special rewards if their efforts were successful. More 
than three hundred special gun licences over and above the 
four thousand in force were granted for the specific purpose of 
shooting the man-eater. Men of the Garhwal Regiments 
stationed in Lansdowne were permitted to take their rifles with 
them when going home on leave, or were provided with 
sporting arms by their officers. Appeals were made through the 
press to sportsmen all over India to assist in the destruction of 
the leopard. Scores of traps of the drop-door type, with goats 
as bait, were erected on approaches to villages and on roads 
frequented by the man-eater. Patwaris and other Government 
officials were supplied with poison for the purpose of poisoning 
human kills, and, last but not least. Government servants, often 
at great personal risk, spent all the time they could spare from 
their official duties in pursuit of the man-eater. 

The total results from all these many and combined efforts 
were a slight gunshot wound which creased the pad of the 
leopard's left hind foot and shot away a small piece of skin from 
one of its toes, and an entry in Government records by the 
Deputy Commissioner of Garhwal that, so far from suffering 
any ill effects, the leopard appeared to thrive on, and be 
stimulated by, the poison he absorbed via human kills. 

Three interesting incidents are recorded in a Government 
report and I will summarize them here. 

First: In response to the press appeal to sportsmen, two young 
British officers arrived at Rudraprayag in 1921 with the 
avowed object of shooting the man-eater. What reason they had 
for thinking that the leopard crossed from bank to bank of the 
Alaknanda river by the Rudraprayag suspension bridge I do not 
know; anyway they decided to confine their efforts to this 
bridge and shoot the leopard as it was crossing at night. There 
are towers at each end of the bridge to carry the suspending 
cables, so one of the young sportsmen sat on the tower on the 
left bank of the river, and his companion sat on the tower on 
the right bank. 



After they had been sitting for two months on these towers, the 
man on the left bank saw the leopard walk out on to the bridge 
from the archway below him. Waiting until the leopard had got 
well on to the bridge, he fired, and as it dashes across, the man 
on the tower on the right bank emptied the six chambers of his 
revolver at it. Next morning blood was found on the bridge and 
on the hill up which the leopard had gone, and as it was 
thought that the wound, or wounds, would be fatal, a search 
was kept up for many days. The report goes on to say that for 
six months after it was wounded the leopard did not kill any 
human beings. 

I was told about this incident by men who had heard the seven 
shots, and who had assisted in trying to recover the wounded 
animal. It was thought by the two sportsmen, and also by my 
informants, that the leopard had been hit in the back by the 
first bullet and possibly in the head by some of the subsequent 
bullets, and it was for this reason that a diligent and prolonged 
search had been made for it. From the particulars given me of 
the blood trail I was of opinion that the sportsmen were wrong 
in thinking that they had inflicted a body and head wound on 
the leopard, for the blood trail as described to me could only 
have been made by a foot wound, and I was very gratified to 
find later that my deductions were correct and that the bullet 
fired by the man on the tower on the left bank had only creased 
the pad of the leopard's left hind foot and shot away a portion 
of one of its toes, and that the man on the right bank had 
missed all his shots. 

Second: After some twenty leopards had been caught and killed 
in traps of the drop-door type, a leopard which everyone 
thought was the man-eater was caught in one of these traps; 
and as the Hindu population were unwilling to kill it for fear 
the spirits of the people whom the man-eater had killed would 
torment them, an Indian Christian was sent for. This Christian 
was living in a village thirty miles away, and before he could 
arrive on the scene, the leopard had dug its way out of the trap, 
and escaped. 



Third: After killing a man the leopard lay up with his kill in a 
small isolated patch of jungle. Next morning, when search was 
being made for the victim, the leopard was detected leaving the 
jungle. After a short chase it was seen to enter a cave, the 
mouth of which was promptly closed with thornbushes heaped 
over with big rocks. Every day a growing crowd of men visited 
the spot. On the fifth day, when some five hundred were 
assembled, a man whose name is not given but whom the 
report described as 'a man of influence' came, and, to quote the 
report, 'said scornfully "there is no leopard in this cave" and 
took the thorns off the cave. As he took the thorns up, the 
leopard suddenly rushed out of the cave and made his way 
safely through a crowd of some five hundred persons who had 
gathered there. 1 

These incidents took place shortly after the leopard had 
become a man-eater, and had the leopard been killed on the 
bridge, shot in the trap, or sealed up in the cave, several 
hundred people need not have died, and Garhwal would have 
been saved many years of suffering. 



Arrival 

IT WAS DURING ONE OF the intervals of Gilbert and 
Sullivan's Yeomen of the Guard, which was showing at the 
Chalet Theatre in Naini Tal in 1925, that I first had any definite 
news of the Rudraprayag man-eater. 

I had heard casually that there was a man-eating leopard in 
Garhwal and had read articles in the press about the animal, 
but knowing that there were over four thousand licensed gun- 
holders in Garhwal, and host of keen sportsmen in Lansdowne, 
only some seventy miles from Rudraprayag, I imagined that 
people were falling over each other in their eagerness to shoot 
the leopard and that a stranger under these circumstances 
would not be welcome. 

It was with no little surprise therefore that, as I stood at the 
Chalet bar that night having a drink with a friend, I heard 
Michael Keene— then Chief Secretary to the Government of the 
United Provinces and later Governor of Assam— telling a group 
of men about the man-eater and trying to persuade them to go 
after it. His appeal, judging from the remark of one of the 
group, and endorsed by the others, was not received with any 
enthusiasm. The remark was, 'Go after a man-eater that has 
killed a hundred people? Not on your life!' 

Next morning I paid Michael Keene a visit and got all the 
particulars I wanted. He was not able to tell me exactly where 
the man-eater was operating, and suggested my going to 
Rudraprayag and getting in touch with Ibbotson. On my return 
home I found a letter from Ibbotson on my table. 

Ibbotson— now Sir William Ibbotson, and lately Adviser to the 
Governor of the United Provinces— had very recently been 
posted to Garhwal as Deputy Commissioner, and one of his first 
acts had been to try to rid his district of the man-eater. It was 
in this connection that he had written to me. 

My preparations were soon made, and by travelling via 
Ranikhet, Adbadri, and Karanprayag, I arrived on the evening 



of the tenth day at a road Inspection Bungalow near Nagrasu. 
When leaving Naini Tal I did not know it was necessary to arm 
myself with a permit to occupy this bungalow; and as the 
caretaker had orders not to allow anyone to occupy it unless so 
armed, the six Garhwalis carrying my kit, my servant, and I 
toiled on for another two miles down the Rudraprayag road 
until we found a suitable place on which to camp for the night. 

While my men busied themselves getting water and dry sticks, 
and my servant collected stones for a cooking-place, I picked 
up an axe and went to cut down thornbushes to make an 
enclosure to protect us during the night, for we had been 
warned ten miles farther up the road that we had entered the 
man-eater's territory. 

Shortly after the fires to cook our evening meal had been lit, a 
very agitated call came down to us from a village far up the 
mountain-side, asking us what we were doing out in the open, 
and warning us that if we remained where we were one or 
more of us would surely be killed by the man-eater. When the 
good Samaritan had delivered his warning, to do which he had 
possibly taken a great risk— for it was then dark— Madho 
Singh, whom you have met elsewhere, (see The Chowgarh 
Tigers' in Man-eaters of Kumaon.) expressed the wishes of all 
present when he said, 'We will stay here, sahib, for there is 
sufficient oil in the lantern to keep it alight all night, and yon 
have your rifle. 1 

There was sufficient oil in the lantern to keep it alight all night, 
for I found it burning when I awoke in the morning, and my 
loaded rifle lay across my bed. But the thorn enclosure was 
very flimsy and we were dead tired after our ten days' march, 
and it the leopard had paid us a visit that night he would have 
secured a very easy victim. 

Next day we arrived at Rudraprayag and were given a warm 
welcome by the men whom Ibbotson had instructed to meet us. 



Investigation 

I SHALL NOT ATTEMPT TO GIVE you a day-by-day account of 
my activities during the ten weeks I spent at Rudraprayag, for 
it would be difficult after this lapse of time to write such an 
account and, if written, it would be boring for you to read. I 
shall confine myself to relating a few of my experiences, 
sometimes while alone and at other times in company with 
Ibbotson. But before doing so I should like to give you some 
idea of the country over which the leopard ranged for eight 
years, and in which I hunted him for ten weeks. 

If you were to climb the hill to the east of Rudraprayag you 
would be able to see the greater portion of the five hundred 
square miles of country that the Rudraprayag man-eater 
ranged over. This area is divided into two more or less equal 
parts by the Alaknanda river, which, after passing 
Karanprayag, flows south to Rudraprayag, where it is met by 
the Mandakini coming down from the north-west. The 
triangular bit of country between the two rivers is less steep 
than the country along the left hank of the Alaknanda, and 
there are consequently more villages in the former area than in 
the latter. 

From your elevated position, the cultivated land in the distance 
shows up as a series of lines drawn across the face of the steep 
mountains. 

These lines are terraced fields which vary in width from a yard 
to, in some cases, fifty or more yards. The village buildings, you 
will note, are invariably set at the upper end of the cultivated 
land; this is done with the object of overlooking and protecting 
the cultivation from stray cattle and wild animals, for except in 
very rare cases there are no hedges or fences round the fields. 
The brown and the green patches that make up most of the 
landscape are, respectively, grassland and forests. Some of the 
villages, you will observe, are entirely surrounded by 
grasslands, while others are entirely surrounded by forests. 

The whole country, as you look down on it, is rugged and 



rough, and is cut up by innumerable deep ravines and rock 
cliffs. In this area there are only two roads, one starting from 
Rudraprayag and going up to Kedarnath, and the other the 
main pilgrim road to Badrinath. Both roads, up to the time I am 
writing about, were narrow and rough and had never had a 
wheel of any kind on them. The number of human beings killed 
between 1918 and 1926 is shown on page below. 

It would be reasonable to assume that more human beings 
would have been killed in villages surrounded by forests than 
in villages surrounded by cultivated land. Had the man-eater 
been a tiger this would undoubtedly have been the ease, but to 
a man-eating leopard, which only operates at night, the 
presence or absence of cover makes no difference, and the only 
reason why there were more kills in one village than in another 
was due, in the one case, to lack of precautions, and in the 
other, to the observance of them. 

I have mentioned that the man-eater was an out-sized male 
leopard long past his prime, but though he was old he was 
enormously strong. The ability of carnivora to carry their kills 
to a place where they can feed undisturbed determines, to a 
great extent, the place they choose to do their killing. To the 
Rudraprayag man-eater all places were alike, for he was 
capable of carrying the heaviest of his human victims for 
distances up to— on one occasion that I know of— four miles. 
On the occasion I refer to the leopard killed a fully grown man 
in his own house and carried his victim for two miles up the 
steep slope of a well-wooded hill, and down the far side for 
another two miles through dense scrub jungle. This was done 
for no apparent reason, for the kill had taken place in the early 
hours of the night and the leopard had not been followed up 
until noon of the next day. 

Leopards— other than man-eaters— are the most easily killed 
of all animals in our jungles, for they have no sense of smell. 

More methods are employed in killing leopards than are 
employed in killing any other animal. These methods vary 



according to whether the leopard is being killed for sport, or 
for profit. The most exciting, and the most interesting, method 
of killing leopards for sport is to track them down in the jungles 
and, when they are located, stalk and shoot them. The easiest, 
and the most cruel, method of killing leopards for profit is to 
insert a small and very highly explosive bomb in the flesh of an 
animal which has been killed by a leopard. Many villagers have 
learnt to make these bombs, and when one of them comes in 
contact with the leopard's teeth, it explodes and blows the 
leopard's jaws off. Death is instantaneous in some cases, but 
more often than not the unfortunate animal crawls away to die 
a lingering and very painful death, for the people who use the 
bombs have not the courage to follow the blood trail left by the 
leopard to dispatch it. 

The tracking, locating, and stalking of leopards, besides being 
exciting and interesting, is comparatively easy. For leopards 
have tender pads and keep to footpaths and game tracks as far 
as possible; they are not hard to locate, for practically every 
bird and animal in the jungle assists the hunter; and they are 
easy to stalk, for, though they are blessed with very keen sight 
and hearing, they are handicapped by having no sense of smell. 
The sportsman can therefore select the line of approach that 
best suits him, irrespective of the direction in which the wind is 
blowing. 

Having tracked, located, and stalked a leopard, far more 
pleasure is got from pressing the button of a camera than is 
ever got from pressing the trigger of a rifle. In the one case the 
leopard can be watched for hours, and there is no more 
graceful and interesting animal in the jungles to watch. The 
button of the camera can be pressed as fancy dictates to make 
a record which never loses its interest. In the other case a 
fleeting glimpse, one press of the trigger, and— if the aim has 
been true— the acquisition of a trophy which soon loses both 
its beauty and its interest. 



The First Kill 

SHORTLY BEFORE MY ARRIVAL AT Rudraprayag, Ibbotson 
had organized a beat which if it had been successful would 
have saved the lives of fifteen human beings. The beat, and the 
circumstances leading up to it, are worthy of record. 

Twenty pilgrims toiling up the road to Badrinath arrived 
towards evening at a small roadside shop. After the shopkeeper 
had met their wants he urged them to be on their way, telling 
them there was only just sufficient daylight left for them to 
reach the pilgrim shelters four miles farther up the road, where 
they would get food and safe shelter. The pilgrims were 
unwilling to accept this advice; they said they had done a long 
march that day and were too tired to walk another four miles, 
and that all they wanted were facilities to prepare and cook 
their evening meal, and permission to sleep on the platform 
adjoining the shop. To this proposal the shopkeeper vigorously 
objected. He told the pilgrims that his house was frequently 
visited by the man-eater, and that to sleep out in the open 
would be to court death. 

While the argument was at its height a sadhu on his way from 
Mathura to Badrinath arrived on the scene and championed the 
cause of the pilgrims. He said that if the shopkeeper would give 
shelter to the women of the party he would sleep on the 
platform with the men, and if any leopard— man-eater or 
otherwise— dared to molest them he would take it by the 
mouth and tear it in half. 

To this proposal the shopkeeper had perforce to agree. So 
while the ten women of the party took shelter in the one- 
roomed shop behind a locked door, the ten men lay down in a 
row on the platform, with the sadhu in the middle. 

When the pilgrims on the platform awoke in the morning they 
found the sadhu missing, the blanket on which he had slept 
rumpled, and the sheet he had used to cover himself with 
partly dragged off the platform and spotted with blood. At the 



sound of the men's excited chattering the shopkeeper opened 
the door, and at a glance saw what had happened. When the 
sun had risen, the shopkeeper, accompanied by the men, 
followed the blood trail down the hill and across three terraced 
fields, to a low boundary wall; here, lying across the wall, with 
the lower portion of his body eaten away, they found the sadhu. 

Ibbotson was staying at Rudraprayag at this time, trying to get 
in touch with the man-eater. There had been no kills during his 
stay, so he decided to beat, on spec, a very likely looking bit of 
cover, on the far side of the Alaknanda, which the locals 
suspected was used by the man-eater as a lying-up place 
during the hours of daylight. So while the twenty pilgrims were 
toiling up the road towards the little shop, the patwaris and 
other members of Ibbotson's staff were going round the near¬ 
by villages warning men to be ready for the beat which was to 
take place on the morrow. 

After an early breakfast next morning Ibbotson accompanied by 
his wife and a friend whose name I have forgotten, and 
followed by some members of his staff and two hundred 
beaters, crossed the Alaknanda by the suspension bridge, went 
up the hill on the far side for a mile or so, and took up positions 
for the beat. 

While the beat was still in progress, word was brought by 
runner of the killing of the sadhu. 

The beat, which proved to be a blank, was completed and a 
hurried council held, the upshot of which was that Ibbotson, his 
party, and the two hundred beaters set off up the right bank, to 
cross the river four miles farther up by a swing bridge, to make 
their way back along the left bank to the scene of the kill, while 
the staff dispersed over the countryside to collect as many men 
as possible and assemble them at the shop. 

By late afternoon two thousand beaters and several additional 
guns had gathered, and the high rugged hill above the shop 
was beaten from top to bottom. If you know Ibbotson, there is 



no need for me to tell you that the beat was very efficiently 
organized, and as efficiently carried nut, and the only reason 
why it failed in its object was that the leopard was not in that 
area. 

When a leopard, or a tiger, leaves of his own accord a kill in the 
open, in an exposed spot, it is an indication that the animal has 
no further interest in the kill. After its feed it invariably 
removes itself to a distance, maybe only two or three miles, or 
in the case of man-eaters, maybe to a distance of ten or more 
miles. So it is quite possible that, while the hill was being 
beaten, the man-eater was peacefully slumbering ten miles 
away. 



Locating the Leopard 

MAN-EATING LEOPARDS ARE OF RARE occurrence, and for 
this reason very little is known about them. 

My own experience of these animals was very limited, 
amounting to no more than a brief encounter with one many 
years previously, and though I suspected that the change-over 
from animal to human-and-animal diet would affect the habits 
of a leopard as much as it does those of a tiger, I did not know 
to what extent a leopard's habits would change, and meanwhile 
I decided to try to kill the man-eater by the methods usually 
employed for killing leopards. 

The most common method of killing leopards is to sit up for 
them, either over a kill or over live bait in the form of a goat or 
a sheep. To carry out either one of these methods it is 
necessary in the one case to find a kill, and in the other to 
locate the quarry. 

My object in going to Rudraprayag was to try to prevent 
further loss of human life, and I had no intention of waiting for 
another human kill to occur over which I could sit, therefore 
the obvious thing to do was to locate the man-eater and shoot it 
over live bait. 

Here a formidable difficulty, which I hoped in time partly to 
overcome, presented itself. From the maps I had been supplied 
with I found that the man-eater was operating over an area of 
roughly five hundred square miles. Five hundred square miles 
of country anywhere would have been a considerable area in 
which to find and shoot any animal, and in this mountainous 
and rugged part of Garhwal the task of finding an animal that 
only operated at night appeared, at first glance, to be well-nigh 
impossible— until I took the Alaknanda river, which divided the 
area into two more or less equal parts, into consideration. 

It was generally believed that the Alaknanda offered no 
obstacle to the man-eater and that when he found it difficult to 
obtain a human kill on one bank, he crossed over to the other 



bank, by swimming the river. 

I discounted this belief. No leopard in my opinion would under 
any circumstances voluntarily commit itself to the swift- 
flowing, ice-cold waters of the Alaknanda, and I was convinced 
that when the man-eater crossed from one bank to the other he 
did so by one of the suspension bridges. 

There were two suspension bridges in the area, one at 
Rudraprayag, and the other about twelve miles farther up the 
river, at Chatwapipal. Between these two bridges there was a 
swing bridge— the one by which Ibbotson, his party, and the 
two hundred men had crossed the river on the day of the beat. 
This swing bridge, which no animal excepting a rat could 
possibly have crossed, was the most fear-compelling structure 
of its kind that I have ever seen. The two hand-twisted grass 
cables, blackened by age and mouldy from the mists rising 
from the river, spanned some two hundred feet of foaming 
white water which, a hundred yards farther down, surged with 
a roar like thunder between two walls of rock, where 
a kakar, driven by wild dogs, is credited with having leapt 
across the Alaknanda. Between the cables, and forming the 
footway, were odd bits of sticks an inch and a half to two inches 
in diameter set about two feet apart and loosely tied to the 
cables with wisps of grass. To add to the difficulty in crossing 
this cobweb structure, one of the cables had sagged, with the 
result that the sticks on which one had to place one's feet were 
at an angle of forty-five degrees. The first time I met this 
fearsome jhula I was foolish enough to ask the toll-collector, 
who for the payment of one pice permitted me to risk my life on 
it, whether the bridge was ever tested or repaired. His answer, 
given as he ran a speculative eye over me, that the bridge was 
never tested or repaired but was replaced when it broke under 
the weight of someone who was trying to cross it, gave me a 
cold feeling down my spine, a feeling that remained with me 
long after I had got safely to the other side. 

This jhula being beyond the powers of the man-eater to cross. 



there remained the two suspension bridges, and I felt sure that 
if I could close them against the leopard I should be able to 
confine him to one side of the Alaknanda, and so reduce by half 
the area in which to look for him. 

The first thing therefore was to try to find out on which bank of 
the river the leopard was. The last kill, of the sadhu, had taken 
place on the left bank of the river a few miles from the 
Chatwapipal suspension bridge, and I felt sure that the leopard 
had crossed this bridge, after abandoning his kill, for no matter 
what precautions the locals and the pilgrims may have taken 
before a kill, their precautions were redoubled immediately 
after one, and made it almost impossible for the leopard to 
secure consecutive kills in the same area. Looking at the map 
you will ask why, if this was so, as many as six kills have been 
shown against a single village. I can only answer that an effort 
cannot be sustained indefinitely. The houses are small and 
without conveniences or means of sanitation, and it would not 
be surprising if, hearing the man-eater was operating in a 
village ten, fifteen, or twenty miles away, some man, woman, or 
child should, at the urgent dictate of nature, open a door for a 
brief minute and so give the leopard the chance for which he 
had perhaps been waiting many nights. 



The Second Kill 

NO PHOTOGRAPHS OR OTHER MEANS by which I could 
identify the man-eater by his pug-marks were available, so, 
until I had been given an opportunity of acquiring this 
information for myself, I decided to treat all leopards in the 
vicinity of Rudraprayag as suspect, and to shoot any that gave 
me a chance. 

The day I arrived at Rudraprayag, I purchased two goats. One 
of these I tied up the following evening a mile along the pilgrim 
road; the other I took across the Alaknanda and tied up on a 
path running through some heavy scrub jungle where I found 
the old pug-marks of a big male leopard. On visiting the goats 
the following morning I found the one across the river had 
been killed and a small portion of it eaten. The goat had 
unquestionably been killed by a leopard, but had been eaten by 
a small animal, possibly a pine-marten. 

Having received on news about the man-eater during the day, I 
decided to sit up over the goat, and at 3 p.m. took up my 
position in the branches of a small tree about fifty yards from 
the kill. During the three hours I sat in the tree I had no 
indication, from either animals or birds, that the leopard was 
anywhere in the vicinity, and as dusk was falling I slipped off 
the tree, cut the cord tethering the goat— which the leopard 
had made no attempt to break the previous night— and set off 
for the bungalow. 

I have already admitted that I had very little previous 
experience of man-eating leopards, but I had met a few man- 
eating tigers, and from the time I left the tree until I reached 
the bungalow I took every precaution to guard against a 
sudden attack; and it was fortunate that I did so. 

I made an early start next morning, and near the gate of the 
bungalow I picked up the tracks of a big male leopard. These 
tracks I followed back to a densely wooded ravine which 
crossed the path close to where the goat was lying. The goat 



had not been touched during the night. 

The leopard that had followed me could only have been the 
man-eater, and for the rest of the day I walked as many miles 
as my legs would carry me, telling all the people in the villages 
I visited, and all whom I met on the roads, that the man-eater 
was on our side of the river, and warning them to be careful. 

Nothing happened that day, but next day, just as I was finishing 
breakfast after a long morning spent in prospecting the jungles 
beyond Golabrai, a very agitated man dashed into the 
bungalow to tell me that a woman had been killed by the man- 
eater the previous night in a village on the hill above the 
bungalow— the same hill and almost at the exact spot from 
where you obtained your bird's-eye view of the five hundred 
square miles of country the man-eater was operating over. 

Within a few minutes I collected all the things I needed— a 
spare rifle and a shotgun, cartridges, rope, and a length of 
fishing-line— and set off up the steep hill accompanied by the 
villager and two of my men. It was a sultry day, and though the 
distance was not great— three miles at the most— the climb of 
four thousand feet in the hot sun was very trying and I arrived 
at the village in a bath of sweat. 

The story of the husband of the woman who had been killed 
was soon told. After their evening meal, which had been eaten 
by the light of the fire, the woman collected the metal pots and 
pans that had been used and carried them to the door to wash, 
while the man sat down to have a smoke. On reaching the door 
the woman sat down on the doorstep, and as she did so the 
utensils clattered to the ground. There was not sufficient light 
for the man to see what had happened, and when he received 
no answer to his urgent call he dashed forward and shut and 
barred the door. 'Of what use', he said, 'would it have been for 
me to risk my life in trying to recover a dead body? 1 His logic 
was sound, though heartless; and I gathered that the grief he 
showed was occasioned not so much by the loss of his wife, as 
by the loss of that son and heir whom he had expected to see 



born within the next few days. 

The door, where the woman had been seized, opened on to a 
four-foot-wide lane that ran for fifty yards between two rows of 
houses. On hearing the clatter of the falling pots and pans, 
followed by the urgent call of the man to his wife, every door in 
the lane had been instantaneously shut. The marks on the 
ground showed that the leopard had dragged the unfortunate 
woman the length of the lane, then killed her, and carried her 
down the hill for a hundred yards into a small ravine that 
bordered some terraced fields. Here he ate his meal, and here 
he left the pitiful remains. 

The body lay in the ravine at one end of a narrow terraced 
field, at the other end of which, forty yards away, was a leafless 
and stunted walnut tree in whose branches a hayrick had been 
built, four feet from the ground and six feet tall. In this hayrick 
I decided to sit. 

Starting from near the body, a narrow path ran down into the 
ravine. On this path were the pug-marks of the leopard that 
had killed the woman, and they were identical with the pug 
marks of the leopard that had followed me two nights 
previously from the killed goat to the Rudraprayag bungalow. 
The pug-marks were of an out-sized male leopard long past his 
prime, with a slight defect where a bullet fired four years 
previously had creased the pad of his left hind paw. 

I procured two stout eight-foot bamboos from the village and 
drove them into the ground close to the perpendicular bank 
that divided the field where the body was laying from the field 
below. To these bamboos I fixed my spare rifle and shotgun 
securely, tied lengths of dressed silk fishing-line to the triggers, 
looped the lines back over the trigger-guards, and fastened 
them to two stakes driven into the hillside on the far side of, 
and a little above, the path. If the leopard came along the path 
he had used the previous night there was a reasonable chance 
of his pulling on the lines and shooting himself; on the other 
hand, if he avoided them, or came by any other way, and I fired 



at him while he was on the kill, he would be almost certain to 
run into the trap which lay on his most natural line of retreat. 
Both the leopard, because of its protective colouring, and the 
body, which had been stripped of all clothing, would be 
invisible in the dark; so to give me an idea of the direction in 
which to fire, I took a slab of white rock from the ravine and 
put it on the edge of the field, about a foot from the near side 
of the body 

My ground arrangements completed to my satisfaction, I made 
myself a comfortable seat on the rick, throwing out some of the 
straw, and heaping some behind me and up to my waist in 
front. As I was facing the kill and had my back to the tree, 
there was little chance of the leopard seeing me, no matter at 
what time he came; and that he would come during the night, 
in spite of his reputation of not returning to his kills, I was 
firmly convinced. My clothes were still wet after the stiff climb, 
but a comparatively dry jacket kept out the chill wind; so I 
settled down into my soft and comfortable seat and prepared 
for an all-night vigil. I sent my men away, and told them to 
remain in the headman's house until I came for them, or until 
the sun was well up next morning. (I had stepped from the 
bank on to the rick and there was nothing to prevent the man- 
eater from doing the same.) 

The sun was near setting, and the view of the Ganges valley, 
with the snowy Himalayas in the background showing bluish 
pink under the level rays of the setting sun, was a feast for the 
eyes. Almost before I realized it, daylight had faded out of the 
sky and night had come. 

Darkness, when used in connection with night, is a relative 
term and has no fixed standard; what to one man would be 
pitch dark, to another would be dark, and to a third moderately 
dark. To me, having spent so much of my life in the open, the 
night is never dark, unless the sky is overcast with heavy 
clouds. I do not wish to imply that I can see as well by night as 
by day; but I can see quite well enough to find my way through 



any jungle or, for that matter, over any ground. I had placed the 
white stone near the body only as a precaution, for I hoped that 
the starlight, with the added reflection from the snowy range, 
would give me sufficient light to shoot by 

But my luck was out; for night had hardly fallen when there 
was a flash of lightning, followed by distant thunder, and in a 
few minutes the sky was heavily overcast. Just as the first big 
drops of a deluge began to fall, I heard a stone roll into the 
ravine, and a minute later the loose straw on the ground below 
me was being scratched up. The leopard had arrived; and while 
I sat in torrential rain with the icy-cold wind whistling through 
my wet clothes, he lay dry and snug in the straw below. The 
storm was one of the worst I have ever experienced, and while 
it was at its height, I saw a lantern being carried towards the 
village, and marvelled at the courage of the man who carried it. 
It was not until some hours later that I learnt that the man who 
so gallantly braved both the leopard and the storm had done a 
forced march of over thirty miles from Pauri to bring me the 
electric night-shooting light the Government had promised me; 
the arrival of this light three short hours earlier might . . . But 
regrets are vain, and who can say that the fourteen people who 
died later would have had a longer span of life if the leopard 
had not buried his teeth in their throats? And again, even if the 
light had arrived in time there is no certainty that I should have 
killed the leopard that night. 

The rain was soon over— leaving me chilled to the bone— and 
the clouds were breaking up when the white stone was 
suddenly obscured, and a little later I heard the leopard eating. 
The night before, he had lain in the ravine and eaten from that 
side; so, expecting him to do the same this night, I had placed 
the stone on the near side of the kill. Obviously, the rain had 
formed little pools in the ravine, and to avoid them the leopard 
had taken up a new position and in doing so had obscured my 
mark. This was something I had not foreseen; however, 
knowing the habits of leopards, I knew I should not have to 
wait long before the stone showed up again. Ten minutes later 



the stone was visible, and almost immediately thereafter I 
heard a sound below me and saw the leopard as a light- 
yellowish object disappearing under the rick. His light colour 
could be accounted for by old age, but the sound he made 
when walking I could not then, nor can I now, account for; it 
was like the soft rustle of a woman's silk dress, and could not 
be explained by stubble in the field— for there was none— or 
by the loose straw lying about. 

Waiting a suitable length of time, I raised the rifle and covered 
the stone, intending to fire the moment it was again obscured; 
but there is a limit to the time a heavy rifle can be held to the 
shoulder, and when the limit had been reached I lowered the 
rifle to ease my aching muscles. I had hardly done so when the 
stone for the second time disappeared from view. Three times 
within the next two hours the same thing happened, and in 
desperation, as I heard the leopard approaching the rick for the 
fourth time, I leant over and fired at the indistinct object below 
me. 

The narrow terrace to which I have given the usual name of 
'field' was only about two feet wide at this point, and when I 
examined the ground next morning [ found my bullet-hole in 
the centre of the two-foot-wide space with a little hair, cut from 
the leopard's neck, scattered round it. 

I saw no more of the leopard that night, and at sunrise I 
collected my men and set off down the steep hill to 
Rudraprayag, whilst the husband and his friends carried away 
the woman's remains for cremation. 



Preparations 

MY THOUGHTS AS, COLD AND STIFF, I walked down the hill 
to Rudraprayag from the scene of my night's failure were very 
bitter, for, from whatever angle it was viewed, there was no 
question that the fickle jade chance had played both Garhwal 
and myself a scurvy trick which we did not deserve. 

However little I merit it, the people of our hills credit me with 
supernatural powers where man-eaters are concerned. News 
that I was on my way to try to rid Garhwal of the man-eater had 
preceded me, and while I was still many days' march from 
Rudraprayag the men I met on the roads, and those who from 
their fields or village homes saw me passing, greeted me with a 
faith in the accomplishment of my mission that was as touching 
as it was embarrassing, and which increased in intensity the 
nearer I approached my destination. Had any been there to 
witness my entry into Rudraprayag, he would have found it 
hard to believe that the man whom the populace thronged 
round was no hero returning from the wars, but a man, very 
sensible of his limitations, who greatly feared that the task he 
had undertaken was beyond his powers of accomplishment. 

Five hundred square miles, much of which was clothed with 
dense scrub jungle, and all of which was rugged and 
mountainous, was an enormous area in which to find and shoot 
one particular leopard out of possibly fifty that inhabited it, and 
the more I saw of the grand and beautiful country the less I 
liked it from the viewpoint of the task I had undertaken. The 
populace quite naturally did not share my misgivings, to them I 
was one who had rid others of man-eaters and who had now 
come among them to rid them of the menace they had lived 
under for eight long years. And then, with incredible good luck, 
I had within a few hours of my arrival got the animal I was in 
pursuit of to kill one of my goats and, by staying out a little 
after dark, to follow me to that side of the Alaknanda where I 
believed it would be less difficult to deal with it than it would 
have been on the other side. Following on this initial success 



had been the kill of the unfortunate woman. I had tried to 
prevent the further loss of human life, and had failed, and my 
failure had presented me with an opportunity of shooting the 
leopard which otherwise I might not have got for many months. 

As I had been toiling uphill behind my guide the previous day, I 
had weighed up my chances of killing the leopard and assessed 
them at two-to-one, despite the facts that the animal had in 
recent years earned the reputation of never returning to a kill, 
that it was a dark night, and that I had no aid to night shooting. 
The day I visited Michael Keene and told him I would go to 
Garhwal he had asked me if I had everything I wanted; and 
hearing that I only lacked a night-shooting light and would 
telegraph to Calcutta for one, he said the least the Government 
could do for me was to provide me with a light; and he 
promised to have the best one procurable waiting for me at 
Rudraprayag. 

Though my disappointment was great when I found that the 
light had not arrived, it was mitigated by my ability to see in 
the dark, the ability on which I had assessed my chances at 
two-to-one. So much depended on the success of that night's 
venture, that I had armed myself with a spare rifle and shot 
gun, and when from my concealed position on the hayrick I 
viewed the scene— the short range at which I should get my 
shot, and the perfectly camouflaged gun-trap into which the 
leopard would of a certainty run if I missed or wounded lum¬ 
my hopes rose high and I put my chances of success at ten-to- 
one. Then had come the storm. With visibility reduced to 
practically nil, and without the electric light, I had failed, and 
my failure would in a few hours be known throughout the 
stricken area. 

Exercise, warm water, and food have a wonderfully soothing 
effect on bitter thoughts, and by the time I had picked my way 
down the steep hillside, had a hot bath, and breakfast, I had 
ceased to rail at fate and was able to take a more reasonable 
view of my night's failure. Regret over a bullet fired into the 



ground was as profitless as regret over milk spilt on sand, and 
provided the leopard had not crossed the Alaknanda my 
chances of killing it had improved, for I now had the electric 
shooting light which the runner had braved both the leopard 
and the storm to bring me. 

The first thing to do was to find out if the leopard had crossed 
the Alaknanda, and as I was firm in my conviction that the only 
way it could do this was by way of the suspension bridges, I set 
out after breakfast to glean this information. I discounted the 
possibility of the leopard having crossed the Chatwapipal 
bridge, for no matter how great the shock he had received by 
the discharge of my heavy rifle a few feet from his head, it was 
not possible that he would have covered the fourteen miles that 
separated the kill from the bridge in the few hours that 
remained between the firing of my shot and daylight, so I 
decided to confine my search to the Rudraprayag bridge. 

There were three approaches to the bridge; one from the north, 
one from the south, and between these two a well-beaten 
footpath from the Rudraprayag bazaar. After examining these 
approaches very carefully I crossed the bridge and examined 
the Kedarnath pilgrim road for half a mile, and then the 
footpath on which three nights previously my goat had been 
killed. Satisfied that the leopard had not crossed the river, I 
determined to put in operation my plan for closing the two 
bridges at night and thus confining the leopard to my side of 
the river. The plan was a simple one and, given the co¬ 
operation of the caretakers of the bridges, both of whom lived 
on the left bank and close to the bridge abutments, was certain 
of success. 

To close the only means of communication between the two 
banks of the river over a stretch of some thirty miles would 
appear to be a very high-handed proceeding, but actually it was 
not so, for no human being dared to use the bridges between 
sunset and sunrise owing to the curfew imposed by the 
leopard. 



The bridges were closed by wedging thornbushes in the four- 
foot-wide archway in the towers carrying the steel cables from 
which the plank footway was suspended, and during the whole 
period that the bridges were closed with thorn, or were 
guarded by me, no human being demanded passage across 
them. 

I spent in all some twenty nights on the tower on the left bank 
of the Rudraprayag bridge, and those nights will never be 
forgotten. The tower was built out on a projecting rock and was 
twenty feet high, and the platform on the top of it, which had 
been worn smooth by the wind, was about four feet wide and 
eight feet long. There were two means of reaching this 
platform, one by swarming along the cables, which ran through 
holes near the top of the tower and were anchored in the 
hillside some fifty feet from the tower, and the other by 
climbing up a very rickety bamboo ladder. I chose the latter 
way, for the cables were coated over with some black and very 
evil-smelling matter which clung to one's hands and 
permanently stained one's clothes. 

The ladder— two uneven lengths of bamboo connected with 
thin sticks loosely held in position with string— only reached to 
within four feet of the platform. Standing on the top rung of the 
ladder and dependent for a handhold on the friction of the 
palms of my hands on the smooth masonry, the safe gaining of 
the platform was an acrobatic feat that had less appeal the 
oftener it was tried. 

All the rivers in this part of the Himalayas flow from north to 
south, and in the valleys through which they flow blows a wind 
which changes direction with the rising and the setting of the 
sun. During daylight hours the wind— locally called dadu— 
blows from the south, and during the hours of night it blows 
from the north. 

At the time when I used to take up my position on the platform 
there was usually a lull in the wind, but shortly thereafter it 
started blowing as a light zephyr gaining in strength as 



daylight faded, and amounting by midnight to a raging gale. 
There was no handhold on the platform and even when lying 
flat on my stomach to increase friction and reduce wind- 
pressure, there was imminent risk of being blown off on to the 
rocks sixty feet below, off which one would have bounced into 
the ice-cold Alaknanda— not that the temperature of the water 
would have been of any interest after a fall of sixty feet on to 
sharp and jagged rocks. Strangely enough, whenever I felt in 
fear of falling it was always the water, and never the rocks, that 
I thought of. Added to the discomfort of the wind, I suffered 
torment from a multitude of small ants, which entered my 
clothes and ate away patches of skin. During the twenty nights 
I guarded the bridge, the thornbushes were not placed in 
position; and in all that long period the bridge was only crossed 
by one living thing— a jackal. 



Magic 

EACH EVENING WHEN I WENT TO the bridge I was 
accompanied by two men who carried the ladder that enabled 
me to climb to the platform, and which they removed after 
handing me my rifle. 

On the second day as we arrived at the bridge, we saw a man 
dressed in flowing white robes with something glinting on his 
head and breast. He carried a six-foot silver cross, and was 
approaching the bridge from the direction of Kedarnath. On 
reaching the bridge the man knelt down and, holding the cross 
in front of him, bowed his head. After remaining in this position 
for a little while he raised the cross high, rose to his feet, took 
a few steps forward, and again knelt down and bowed his head. 
This he continued to do at short intervals all the way across the 
long bridge. 

As he passed me the man raised his hand in salutation, but 
since he appeared to be deep in prayer I did not speak to him. 
The glints I had seen on his head-dress and breast were, I 
perceived, silver crosses. 

My men had been as interested in this strange apparition as I 
had been, and watching him climb the steep footpath to the 
Rudraprayag bazaar, they asked me what manner of man he 
was, and from what country he had come. That he was a 
Christian was apparent, and as I had not heard him speak I 
assumed from his long hair, jet-black luxuriant beard, and what 
I could see of his features, that he was a man from Northern 
India. 

The following morning, when with the help of the ladder I had 
climbed down from the tower and was proceeding to the 
Inspection Bungalow, where I passed that portion of the 
daylight hours that I did not spend in visiting near and distant 
villages in search of news of the man-eater, I saw the tall white- 
robed figure standing on a great slab of rock near the road, 
surveying the river. At my approach he left the rock and 



greeted me, and when I asked him what had brought him to 
these parts he said he had come— from a distant land— to free 
the people of Garhwal from the evil spirit that was tormenting 
them. When I asked how he proposed accomplishing this feat, 
he said he would make an effigy of a tiger and after he had, by 
prayer, induced the evil spirit to enter it, he would set the 
effigy afloat on the Ganges and the river would convey it down 
to the sea from where it could not return, and where it would 
do no farther harm to human beings. 

However much I doubted the man's ability to accomplish the 
task he had set himself, I could not help admiring his faith and 
his industry. He arrived each morning before I left the tower, 
and I found him still at work when I returned in the evening, 
labouring with split bamboos, string, paper, and cheap coloured 
cloth on his 'tiger 1 . When the effigy was nearing completion a 
heavy rainstorm one night made the whole structure come 
unstuck, but, nothing daunted, he cheerfully started on it again 
next morning, singing as he worked. 

Came at last the great day when the 'tiger'— about the size of a 
horse, and resembling no known animal— was fashioned to his 
satisfaction. 

Who is there among our hill-folk who does not whole-heartedly 
enjoy taking part in a tamasha? When the effigy, tied to a long 
pole, was carried down a steep path to a small sandy beach, it 
had an escort of over a hundred men, many of whom were 
beating gongs and blowing long trumpets. 

At the river's edge the effigy was unlashed from the pole. The 
white-robed man, with his silver crosses on headgear and 
breast and his six-foot cross in his hands, knelt on the sand, 
and with earnest prayer induced the evil spirit to enter his 
handiwork, and then the effigy, with a crash of gongs and blare 
of trumpets, was consigned to the Ganges, and speeded on its 
way to the sea by a liberal offering of sweets and flowers. 

Next morning the familiar figure was absent from the rock, and 



when I asked some men who were on their way to have an 
early dip in the river where my friend of the flowing robes had 
come from, and where he had gone, they answered, 'Who can 
tell whence a holy man has come, and who dare question 
whither he has departed? 1 

These men with sandalwood-paste caste-marks on their 
foreheads, who spoke of the man as 'holy', and all those others 
who had taken part in the launching ceremony, were Hindus. 

In India, where there are no passports or identity discs, and 
where religion counts for so much— except among those few 
who have crossed the 'black water'— I believe that a man 
wearing a saffron robe, or carrying a beggar's bowl, or with 
silver crosses on his headgear and chest, could walk from the 
Khyber Pass to Cape Comorin without once being questioned 
about his destination, or the object of his journey 



A Near Escape 

WHILE I WAS STILL GUARDING THE bridge, Ibbotson and his 
wife Jean arrived from Pauri, and as the accommodation in the 
Inspection Bungalow was very limited I moved out to make 
room for them, and set up my forty-pound tent on the hill on 
the far side of the pilgrim road. 

A tent afforded little protection against an animal that had left 
his claw-marks on every door and window for miles round, so I 
helped my men to put a thorn fence round the ground we 
intended to camp on. Overhanging this plot of ground was a 
giant prickly-pear-tree, and as its branches interfered with the 
erection of the tent I told the men to cut it down. When the tree 
had been partly cut through I changed my mind, for I saw that I 
should be without shade during the heat of the day, so instead 
of felling the tree I told the men to lop the overhanging 
branches. This tree, which was leaning over the camp at an 
angle of forty-five degrees, was on the far side of the fence. 

There were eight of us in the little camp, and when we had 
eaten our evening meal I wedged a thornbush securely into the 
opening in the fence we had entered by, and as I did so I 
noticed that it would be very easy for the man-eater to climb 
the tree and drop down on our side of the fence. However, it 
was too late then to do anything about it, and if the leopard left 
us alone for that one night, the tree could be cut down and 
removed in the morning. 

I had no tents for my men, and had intended that they should 
sleep with Ibbotson's men in the outbuildings of the Inspection 
Bungalow, but this they had refused to do, asserting that there 
was no more danger for them than there was for me in the 
open tent. My cook— who was, I discovered, a very noisy 
sleeper— was lying next to and about a yard from me, and 
beyond him, packed like sardines in the little enclosure, were 
the six Garhwalis I had brought from Naini Tal. 

The weak spot in our defence was the tree, and I went to sleep 



thinking of it. 

It was a brilliant moonlit night, and round about midnight I was 
suddenly awakened by hearing the leopard climbing the tree. 
Picking up the riffle, which was lying ready loaded on the bed, I 
swung my legs off the bed and had just slipped my feet into my 
slippers— to avoid the thorns which were scattered all round— 
when there was an ominous crack from the partly-cut-through 
tree, followed by a yell from the cook of 'Bagh! Bagh!' In one 
jump I was outside the tent and, swinging round, was just too 
late to get the rifle to bear on the leopard as it sprang up the 
bank on to a terraced field. Pulling the bush out of the gap I 
dashed up to the field which was about forty yards in width and 
bare of crops, and as I stood scanning the hillside dotted over 
with thornbushes and a few big rocks, the alarm call of a jackal 
far up the hill informed me that the leopard had gone beyond 
my reach. 

The cook informed me later that he had been lying on his back 
— a fact of which I had long been aware— and hearing the tree 
crack he had opened his eyes and looked straight into the 
leopard's face just as it was preparing to jump down. 

The tree was cut down next day and the fence strengthened, 
and though we stayed in that camp for several weeks our 
slumbers were not again disturbed. 



The Gin-Trap 

FROM REPORTS RECEIVED FROM NEARBY villages where 
unsuccessful attempts had been made to break into houses, 
and from the pug-marks I had seen on the roads, I knew that 
the man-eater was still in the vicinity and a few days after the 
arrival of the Ibbotsons, news was brought that a cow had been 
killed in a village two miles from Rudraprayag, and about half a 
mile from the village where I had sat on the hayrick in a walnut 
tree. 

Arrived at the village we found that a leopard had broken down 
the door of a one-roomed house and had killed and dragged to 
the door one of the several cows that were in it, and not being 
able to drag it through the door, had left it on the threshold 
after eating a good meal. 

The house was in the heart of the village, and on prospecting 
round, we found that by making a hole in the wall of a house a 
few yards away we could overlook the kill. 

The owner of this house, who was also the owner of the 
dead cow, was only too willing to fall in with our plans, and as 
evening closed in we locked ourselves very securely into the 
room, and after eating our sandwiches and drinking the tea we 
had brought with us, we mounted guard in turns over the hole 
in the wall throughout the long night without either seeing or 
hearing anything of the leopard. 

When we emerged in the morning the villagers took us round 
the village, which was of considerable size, and showed us the 
claw-marks on doors and windows made by the man-eater in 
the course of years, in his attempts to get at the inmates. One 
door in particular had more and deeper claw-marks than any 
other— it was the door the leopard had forced to enter the 
room in which the forty goats and the boy had been secured. A 
day or two later another cow was reported to have been killed 
in a small village on the hill a few hundred yards from the 
bungalow. Here again we found that the cow had been killed 



inside a house, dragged as far as the door, and partly eaten. 
Facing the door, and distant from it about ten yards, was a 
newly built hayrick, sixteen feet tall and built on a wooden 
platform two feet above ground. 

News of the kill was brought to us early in the morning, so we 
had the whole day before us, and the machan we built by 
evening was I am sure not only the most effective, but also the 
most artistic, that has ever been constructed for a similar 
purpose. 

To start with, the rick was dismantled, and a scaffolding of 
poles was set round the platform. With these poles to support 
it, a second, and smaller, platform was built four feet above the 
lower one. Two-inch-mesh wire-netting was then wound round 
the whole structure, leaving only the space bare between the 
lower platform and the ground. Wisps of straw were then 
looped into the meshes of the netting, and a little straw was 
spread round the rick and under the platform, just as it had 
been before we started work. One of the joint owners of the 
hayrick, who had been absent from the village for a day or two 
and who returned just as we had finished our task, would not 
believe that the rick had been disturbed until he felt it all 
round, and had been shown the second rick we had built with 
the spare hay in an adjoining field. 

As the sun was setting we crawled through the hole we had left 
in and entered the machan, securely closing the entrance 
behind us. Ibbotson is a little shorter than me, so he took the 
upper platform, and when we had made ourselves comfortable 
we each made a small hole in the straw to shoot through. As it 
would not be possible for us to communicate with each other 
once the leopard arrived, we agreed that whoever saw it first 
was to fire. It was a bright moonlit night, so there was no need 
for either of us to use the electric light. 

Sounds in the village quietened down after the evening meal 
had been eaten, and at about 10 p.m. I heard the leopard 
coming down the hill behind us. On arriving at the rick it 



paused for a few minutes and then started to crawl under the 
platform I was sitting on. Immediately below me, and with only 
the thickness of a plank between my seat and his head, he 
paused for a long minute and then started to crawl forward; 
and just as I was expecting him to emerge from under the 
platform and give me an easy shot at a range of three or four 
feet, there was a loud creak in the platform above me. The 
leopard dashed out to the right, where I could not see him, and 
went up the hill. The creaking of the planks at the critical 
moment had resulted from Ibbotson changing his position to 
relieve a very painful cramp in both legs. After the fright he 
had got, the leopard abandoned the kill and did not return that 
night, or the next night. 

Two nights later another cow was killed a few hundred yards 
above the Rudraprayag bazaar. 

The owner of this cow lived alone in an isolated house which 
contained only one room, a room which was divided by a rough 
partition made of odd bits of plank into a kitchen and living- 
room. Sometime during the night a noise in the kitchen— the 
door of which he had forgotten to shut— awakened the man, 
and a little later, in the dim moonlight which the open door was 
admitting, he saw the leopard through the wide chinks in the 
partition, trying to tear one of the planks out. 

For a long time the man lay and sweated, while the leopard 
tried plank after plank. Eventually, being unable to find a weak 
place in the partition, the leopard left the kitchen, and killed 
the man's cow; which was tethered in a grass lean-to against 
the side of the house. After killing the cow the leopard broke 
the rope by which it was tethered, dragged it a short distance 
from the lean-to, and left it out in the open after partaking of a 
good meal. 

On the very edge of the hill, and about twenty yards from 
where the dead cow was lying, there was a fair-sized tree, in 
the upper branches of which a hayrick had been built; on this 
natural machan— from which there was a sheer drop of several 



hundred feet into the valley below— Ibbotson and I decided to 
sit. 

To assist in killing the man-eater, the Government a few days 
previously had sent us a gin-trap. This trap, which was five feet 
long and weighed eighty pounds, was the most fearsome thing 
of its kind I have ever seen. Its jaws, armed with sharp teeth 
three inches long, had a spread of twenty-four inches, and were 
actuated by two powerful springs, which needed two men to 
compress. 

When leaving the kill the leopard had followed a footpath 
across a field about forty yards wide, up a three-foot bank, and 
across another field bordered by a densely scrub-covered hill. 
At this three-foot step from the upper to the lower field, we set 
the trap, and to ensure the leopard stepping on to it we planted 
a few thorn twigs on either side of the path. To one of the trap 
was attached a short length of half-inch-thick chain, 
terminating in a ring three inches in diameter; through this 
ring we drove a stout peg, chaining the trap to the ground. 

When these arrangements had been completed, Jean Ibbotson 
returned to the bungalow with our men, and Ibbotson and I 
climbed up to the hayrick. After tying a stick in front of us and 
looping a little hay over it, to act as a screen, we made 
ourselves comfortable, and waited for the leopard, which we 
felt sure would not escape us on this occasion. 

As evening closed in heavy clouds spread over the sky, and as 
the moon was not due to rise until 9 p.m., we had of necessity 
to depend on the electric light for the accuracy of our shooting 
until then. This light was a heavy and cumbersome affair, and 
as Ibbotson insisted on my taking the shot, I attached it to my 
riffle with some little difficulty. 

An hour after dark a succession of angry roars apprised us of 
the fact that the leopard was in the trap. Switching on the 
electric light, I saw the leopard rearing up with the trap 
dangling from his forelegs, and taking a hurried shot, my -450 



bullet struck a link in the chain and severed it. 


Freed from the peg the leopard went along the field in a series 
of great leaps, carrying the trap in front of him, followed up by 
the bullet from my left barrel, and two lethal bullets from 
Ibbotson's shot gun, all of which missed him. In trying to reload 
my rifle I displaced some part of the light, after which it 
refused to function. 

Hearing the roars of the leopard and our four shots, the people 
in Rudraprayag bazaar, and in nearby villages, swarmed out of 
their houses carrying lanterns and pinetorches, and converged 
from all sides on the isolated house. Shouting to them to keep 
clear was of no avail, for they were making so much noise that 
they could not hear us; so while I climbed down the tree, taking 
my rifle with me— a hazardous proceeding in the dark— 
Ibbotson lit and pumped up the petrol lamp we had taken into 
the machan with us. Letting the lamp down to me on the end of 
a length of rope, Ibbotson joined me on the ground, and 
together we went in the direction the leopard had taken. 
Halfway along the field there was a hump caused by an outcrop 
of rock; this hump we approached, with Ibbotson holding the 
heavy lamp high above his head, while I walked by his side with 
rifle to shoulder. Beyond the hump was a little depression, and 
crouching down in this depression and facing us and growling, 
was the leopard. Within a few minutes of my bullet crashing 
into his head, we were surrounded by an excited crowd, who 
literally danced with joy round their long-dreaded enemy. 

The animal that lay dead before me was an out-sized male 
leopard, who the previous night had tried to tear down a 
partition to get at a human being, and who had been shot in an 
area in which dozens of human beings had been killed, all good 
and sufficient reasons for assuming that he was the man-eater. 
But I could not make myself believe that he was the same 
animal I had seen the night I sat over the body of the woman. 
True, it had been a dark night and I had only vaguely seen the 
outline of the leopard; even so, I was convinced that the animal 



that was now being lashed to a pole by willing hands was not 
the man-eater. 

With the Ibbotsons leading the way followed by the men 
carrying the leopard and a crowd of several hundred men, we 
set off via the bazaar for the bungalow. 

As I stumbled down the hill in the wake of the procession— the 
only one in all that throng who did not believe that the man- 
eating leopard of Rudraprayag was dead— my thoughts went 
back to an occurrence that had taken place not far from our 
winter home when I was a small boy and which I saw 
recounted many years later in a book entitled Brave Deeds, or 
perhaps it was Bravest Deeds. The occurrence concerned two 
men: Smeaton of the Indian Civil Service and Braidwood of the 
Forest Department. One dark stormy night, in pre-railway days, 
these two men were travelling in a dak-gharry from Moradabad 
to Kaladhungi, and on going round a bend in the road they ran 
into a rogue elephant. In killing the driver and the two horses, 
the elephant overturned the gharry. Braidwood had a rifle, and 
while he got it out of its case, put it together, and loaded it, 
Smeaton climbed on to the gharry and released the one 
unbroken lamp from its socket. Then Smeaton, holding the oil 
lamp which only gave a glimmer of light over his head, 
advanced up to the elephant and shone the light on his 
forehead, to enable Braidwood to get in a killing shot. 
Admittedly there was a great difference between a rogue 
elephant and a leopard; even so, there are few who would care 
to walk up to a pain-maddened leopard— which we later found 
had practically torn its paw free and was only held by a thin 
strip of skin— holding a lamp above his head and depending for 
safety on a companion's bullet. 

For the first night in many years every house in the bazaar was 
open, with women and children standing in the doorways. 
Progress was slow, for every few yards the leopard was put 
down to let the children cluster round and get a better view of 
it. At the farther end of the long street our escort left us, and 



the leopard was carried in triumph to the Bungalow by our 
men. 

Returning to the bungalow after a wash at my camp, the 
Ibbotsons and I, both during and long after it, put forward our 
arguments for and against the dead leopard being the man- 
eater. Eventually, without either side convincing the other, we 
decided that as Ibbotson had to get back to his work at Pauri, 
and I was tired out after my long stay at Rudraprayag, we 
would spend the next day in skinning the leopard and drying 
the skin, and on the day after would break camp and make for 
Pauri. 

From early morning to late evening relays of men kept coming 
in from near and distant villages to see the leopard, and as 
most of these men asserted that they recognized the animal as 
the man-eater, the conviction of the Ibbotsons, that they were 
right and I was wrong, grew. Two concessions at my request 
Ibbotson made: he added his warning to the people to mind, 
not to relax precautions against the man-eater, and he 
refrained from telegraphing to tell the Government that we had 
shot the man-eater. 

We went early to bed that night, for we were to start at 
daybreak next morning. I was up while it was still dark and was 
having chota hazri when I heard voices on the road. As this was 
very unusual, I called out to ask what men were doing on the 
road at that hour. On seeing me, four men climbed up the path 
to my camp, and informed me they had been sent by 
the patwari to tell me that a woman had been killed by the 
man-eater on the far side of the river, about a mile from the 
Chatwapipal bridge. 



The Hunters Hunted 

IBBOTSON WAS JUST UNBOLTING THE door to admit his man 
with early tea when I arrived, and after he had countermanded 
his move to Pauri we sat on Jean's bed with a large-scale map 
between us, drinking tea and discussing our plans. 

Ibbotson's work at his headquarters at Pauri was pressing, and 
at most he could only spare two more days and nights. I had 
telegraphed to Naini Tal the previous day to say I was 
returning home via Pauri and Kotdwara; this telegram I 
decided to cancel, and instead of going by rail, I would return 
on foot the way I had come. These details settled, and the 
village where the woman had been killed found on the map, I 
returned to camp to tell my men of our change of plans, and to 
instruct them to pack up and follow us, accompanied by the 
four men who had brought news of the kill. 

Jean was to remain at Rudraprayag, so after breakfast Ibbotson 
and I set off on two of his horses, a Gulf Arab and an English 
mare, two of the most surefooted animals I have ever had the 
good fortune to ride. 

We took our rifles, a blue-flame stove, a petrol-lamp, and some 
provisions with us, and were accompanied by one of Ibbotson's 
syces on a borrowed horse, carrying food for our horses. 

We left the horses at the Chatwapipal bridge. This bridge had 
not been closed the night we shot the leopard, with the result 
that the man-eater had got across the river and secured a kill 
at the first village he visited. 

A guide was waiting for us at the bridge, and he took us up a 
very steep ridge and along a grassy hillside, and then down 
into a deep and densely wooded ravine with a small stream 
flowing through it. Here we found the patwari and some twenty 
men guarding the kill. 

The kill was a very robust and fair girl, some eighteen or 
twenty years of age. She was lying on her face with her hands 



by her sides. Every vestige of clothing had been stripped from 
her, and she had been licked by the leopard from the soles of 
her feet to her neck, in which were four great teeth-marks; only 
a few pounds of flesh had been eaten from the upper portion of 
her body, and a few pounds from the lower portion. 

The drums we had heard as we came up the hill were being 
beaten by the men who were guarding the kill, and as it was 
then about 2 p.m. and there was no chance of the leopard 
being anywhere in the vicinity, we went up to the village to 
brew ourselves some tea, taking the patwari and the guard 
with us. 

After tea we went and had a look at the house where the girl 
had been killed. It was a stone-built house, consisting of one 
room, situated in the midst of terraced fields some two or three 
acres in extent, and it was occupied by the girl, her husband, 
and their six-month-old child. 

Two days previous to the kill, the husband had gone to Pauri to 
give evidence in a land dispute case, and had left his father in 
charge of the house. On the night of the kill, after the girl and 
her father-in-law had partaken of their evening meal and it was 
getting near time to retire for the night, the girl, who had been 
nursing her child, handed it over to her father-in-law, unlatched 
the door, and stepped outside to squat down— I have already 
mentioned that there are no sanitary conveniences in the 
houses of our hill-folk. 

When the child was transferred from the mother to the 
grandfather, it started crying, so even if there had been any 
sound from outside— and I am sure there was none— he would 
not have heard it. It was a dark night. After waiting for a few 
minutes the man called to the girl; and receiving no answer he 
called again. Then he got up and hurriedly closed and latched 
the door. 

Rain had fallen earlier in the evening and it was easy to 
reconstruct the scene. Shortly after the rain had stopped, the 



leopard, coming from the direction of the village, had crouched 
down behind a rock in the field, about thirty yards to the left 
front of the door. Here it had lain for some time— possibly 
listening to the man and the girl talking. When the girl opened 
the door she squatted down on its right-hand side, partly 
turning her back on the leopard, who had crept round the far 
side of the rock, covered the twenty yards separating him from 
the comer of the house with belly to ground and, creeping 
along close to the wall of the house, had caught the girl from 
behind, and dragged her to the rock. Here, when the girl was 
dead, or possibly when the man called out in alarm, the leopard 
had picked her up and, holding her high, so that no mark of 
hand or foot showed on the soft newly ploughed ground, had 
carried her across one field, down a three-foot bank, and across 
another field which ended in a twelve-foot drop on to a well- 
used footpath. Down this drop the leopard had sprung with the 
girl— who weighed about eleven stone— in his mouth, and 
some idea of his strength will be realized from the fact that 
when he landed on the footpath he did not let any portion of 
her body come in contact with the ground. 

Crossing the footpath he had gone straight down the hill for 
half a mile, to the spot where he had undressed the girl. After 
eating a little of her, he had left her lying in a little glade of 
emerald-green grass, under the shade of a tree roofed over 
with dense creepers. 

At about four o'clock we went down to sit over the kill, taking 
the petrol-lamp and night-shooting light with us. 

It was reasonable to assume that the leopard had heard the 
noise the villagers made when searching for the girl, and later 
when guarding the body, and that if it returned to the kill it 
would do so with great caution; so we decided not to sit near 
the kill, and selected a tree about sixty yards away on the hill 
overlooking the glade. 

This tree, a stunted oak, was growing out of the hill at almost a 
right angle, and after we had hidden the petrol-lamp in a little 



hollow and covered it over with pine-needles, Ibbotson took his 
seat in a fork of the tree from where he had a clear view of the 
kill, while I sat on the trunk with my back to him and facing the 
hill; Ibbotson was to take the shot, while I saw to our safety As 
the shooting light was not functioning— possibly because the 
battery had faded out— our plan was to sit up as long as 
Ibbotson could see to shoot and then, with the help of the 
petrol-lamp, get back to the village where we hoped to find that 
our men had arrived from Rudraprayag. 

We had not had time to prospect the ground, but the villagers 
had informed us that there was heavy jungle to the east of the 
kill, to which they felt sure the leopard had retired when they 
drove it off. If the leopard came from this direction, Ibbotson 
would see it long before it got to the glade and would get an 
easy shot, for his rifle was fitted with a telescopic sight which 
not only made for accurate shooting, but which also gave us an 
extra half-hour, as we had found from tests. When a minute of 
daylight more or less may make the difference between success 
and failure, this modification of the light factor is very 
important. 

The sun was setting behind the high hills to the west, and we 
had been in shadow for some minutes when a kakar dashed 
down the hill, barking, from the direction in which we had been 
told there was heavy jungle. On the shoulder of the hill the 
animal pulled up, and after barking in one spot for some time 
went away on the far side, and the sound dies away in the 
distance. 

The kakar had undoubtedly been alarmed by a leopard, and 
though it was quite possible that there were other leopards in 
that area, my hopes had been raised, and when I looked round 
at Ibbotson I saw that he too was keyed up, and that he had 
both hands on his rifle. 

Light was beginning to fade, but was good enough to shoot by 
even without the aid of the telescopic sight, when a pine-cone 
dislodged from behind some low bushes thirty yards above us 



came rolling down the hill and struck the tree close to my feet. 
The leopard had arrived and, possibly suspecting danger, had 
taken a line that would enable him to prospect, from a safe 
place on the hill all the ground in the vicinity of his kill. 
Unfortunately, in so doing he had got our tree in a direct line 
with the kill, and though I, who was showing no outline, might 
escape observation, he would be certain to see Ibbotson, who 
was sitting in a fork of the tree. 

When sufficient light for me to shoot by had long since gone, 
and Ibbotson's telescopic sight was no longer of any use to him, 
we heard the leopard coming stealthily down towards the tree. 
It was then time to take action, so I asked Ibbotson to take my 
place, while I retrieved the lamp. This lamp was of German 
make and was called a petromax. It gave a brilliant light but, 
with its long body and longer handle, was not designed to be 
used as a lantern in a jungle. 

I am a little taller than Ibbotson, and suggested that I should 
carry the lamp, but Ibbotson said he could manage all right, 
and, moreover, that he would rather depend on my rifle than 
his own. So we set off, Ibbotson leading and I following with 
both hands on my rifle. 

Fifty yards from the tree, while climbing over a rock, Ibbotson 
slipped, the base of the lamp came in violent contact with the 
rock, and the mantle fell in dust to the bottom of the lamp. The 
streak of blue flame directed from the nozzle on to the petrol 
reservoir gave sufficient light for us to see where to put our 
feet, but the question was how long we should have even this 
much light. Ibbotson was of the opinion that he could carry the 
lamp for three minutes before it burst. Three minutes, in which 
to do a stiff climb of half a mile, over ground on which it was 
necessary to change direction every few steps to avoid huge 
rocks and thornbushes, and possibly followed— and actually 
followed as we found later— by a man-eater, was a terrifying 
prospect. 

There are events in one's life which, no matter how remote. 



never fade from memory; the climb up that hill in the dark was 
for me one of them. When we eventually reached the footpath 
our troubles were not ended, for the path was a series of 
buffalo wallows, and we did not know where our men were. 
Alternately slipping on wet ground and stumbling over unseen 
rocks, we at last came to some stone steps which took off from 
the path and went up to the right. Climbing these steps we 
found a small courtyard, on the far side of which was a door. 

We had heard the gurgling of a hookah as we came up the 
steps, so I kicked the door and shouted to the inmates to open. 
As no answer came, I took out a box of matches and shook it, 
crying that if the door was not opened in a minute I would set 
the thatch alight. On this an agitated voice came from inside 
the house, begging me not to set the house on fire, and saying 
that the door was being opened— a minute later first the inner 
door and then the outer door were opened, and in two strides 
Ibbotson and I were in the house, slamming the inner door, and 
putting our backs to it. 

There were some twelve or fourteen men, women, and children 
of all ages in the room. When the men had regained their wits 
after the unceremonious entry, they begged us to forgive them 
for not having opened the doors sooner, adding that they and 
their families had lived so long in terror of the man-eater that 
their courage had gone. Not knowing what form the man-eater 
might take, they suspected every sound they heard at night. In 
their fear they had our full sympathy, for from the time 
Ibbotson had slipped and broken the mantle, and a few minutes 
later had extinguished the red-hot lamp to prevent it bursting, I 
had been convinced that one, and possibly both, of us would 
not live to reach the village. 

We were told that our men had arrived about sundown, and 
that they had been housed in a block of buildings farther along 
the hill. The two able-bodied men in the room offered to show 
us the way, but as we knew it would be murder to let them 
return to their homes alone, we declined their offer— which 
had been made with the full realization of the risk it would 



entail— and asked if they could provide us with a light of some 
kind. After rummaging about in a corner of the room, an old 
and decrepit lantern with a cracked globe was produced, and 
when vigorous shaking had revealed that it contained a few 
drops of oil, it was lit, and with the combined good wishes of 
the inmates we left the house— the two doors being shut and 
bolted on our heels. 

More buffalo wallows and more sunken rocks, but with the 
glimmer of light to help us we made good progress and, finding 
the second lot of steps we had been instructed to climb, we 
mounted them and found ourselves in a long courtyard facing a 
row of double-storied buildings extending to the right and to 
the left, every door of which was fast shut, and not a glimmer 
of light showing anywhere. 

When we called a door was opened, and by climbing a short 
flight of stone steps we gained the veranda of the upper story, 
and found the two adjoining rooms which had been placed at 
the disposal of our men and ourselves. While the men were 
relieving us of the lamp and our rifles, a dog arrived from 
nowhere. He was just a friendly village pye, and after sniffing 
round our legs and wagging his tail, he went towards the steps 
up which we had just come. The next second, with a scream of 
fear followed by hysterical barking, he backed towards us with 
all his hair on end. 

The lantern we had been lent had died on us as we reached the 
courtyard, but our men had procured its twin brother. Though 
Ibbotson held it at all angles while I hurriedly reloaded my 
rifle, he could not get its light to illuminate the ground eight 
feet below. 

By watching the dog it was possible to follow the movements of 
the leopard. When the leopard had crossed the yard and gone 
down the steps leading to the footpath, the dog gradually 
stopped barking and lay down intently watching in that 
direction, and growling at intervals. 



The room that had been vacated for us had no windows, and as 
the only way in which we could have occupied it in safety 
would have been by closing the solid door, and excluding all air 
and light, we decided to spend the night on the veranda. The 
dog evidently belonged to the late occupant of the room and 
had been accustomed to sleeping there, for he lay contentedly 
at our feet and gave us a feeling of safety as we watched in 
turn through the long hours of the night. 



Retreat 

AT DAYBREAK NEXT MORNING WE very carefully stalked the 
kill, and were disappointed to find that the leopard had not 
returned to it, which we felt sure he would do after his failure 
to bag one of us the previous evening. 

During the day while Ibbotson dealt with some office work that 
had been sent out to him, I took a rifle and went off to see if I 
could get a shot at the leopard. Tracking on the hard and pine- 
needle-covered ground was not possible, so I made for the 
shoulder of the hill beyond which the villagers had told us 
there was heavy jungle. Here I found the ground very difficult 
to negotiate, for, in addition to dense scrub jungle through 
which it was not possible to penetrate, there was a series of 
rock cliffs on which it was impossible for a human being to find 
foothold. In this area there was a surprisingly large herd of 
game, and on the paths that intersected it I found the tracks 
of kakar, ghooral, pig, and a solitary sarao. Of the leopard— 
except for a few old scratch-marks— I found no trace. 

The gin-trap that had been sent off from Rudraprayag the 
previous day arrived while we were having lunch, and in the 
early evening we took it down to the glade and, after setting it, 
poisoned the kill with cyanide. I had no experience of poisons, 
nor had Ibbotson, but in a conversation with a doctor friend 
before leaving Naini Tal I had mentioned that Government 
wanted me to try every means to kill the man-eater, and that 
there was little use in my trying poison, as the records showed 
that the leopard throve on it. I told him what poisons had 
hitherto been tried, and he then recommended my using 
cyanide, which was the best poison for the cat family. I had 
passed this information on to Ibbotson, and a few days 
previously a supply had arrived, with capsules with which to 
use it. We inserted a few of these capsules in the kill at the 
places where the leopard had eaten. 

There was every hope of the leopard returning to the kill this 
second night, and as he had seen us on the tree the previous 



evening we decided not to sit up, but to leave him to the gin- 
trap and to the poison. 

In a big pine-tree near the footpath we built a machan, which 
we padded with hay and on which we took up our position after 
we had eaten the dinner which Ibbotson cooked on the blue- 
flame stove. Here on the comfortable machan we were able to 
lie at full stretch and talk and smoke, for our only reason for 
being there was to listen for sounds from the direction of the 
kill. We watched and slept by turns, hoping to hear the angry 
roar of the leopard if by accident it walked into the trap, for 
here there was no well-used track along which to direct the 
leopard to it. 

Once during the night a kakar barked, but in the opposite 
direction to that from which we expected the leopard to come. 

At the first streak of dawn we climbed out of the tree and, after 
brewing ourselves a cup of tea, visited the kill, which we found 
lying just as we had left it. 

Ibbotson left for Rudraprayag after an early breakfast, and I 
was packing my things and having a final word with the 
villagers before starting on my fifteen-day journey back to 
Naini Tal when a party of men arrived to give the news that a 
cow had been killed by a leopard in a village four miles away. 
They suspected that the cow had been killed by the man-eater, 
for the previous night— the night the leopard had followed 
Ibbotson and myself from the tree to the veranda— and 
towards the small hours of the morning, the leopard had made 
a determined attempt to break down the door of the headman's 
house; late the following evening, the cow had been killed in 
the jungle three hundred yards from this house. At the urgent 
request of these men I postponed my departure to Naini Tal 
and accompanied them back to their village, taking the gin-trap 
and a supply of poison with me. 

The headman's house was on a little knoll surrounded by 
cultivated land, and was approached by a footpath which for a 



short distance ran over soft and boggy ground; here I found the 
pug-marks of the man-eater. 

The headman had seen me approaching across the valley and 
had a steaming dish of tea brewed in fresh milk and sweetened 
with jaggery waiting for me. While I drank this rich and over¬ 
sweetened liquid on the courtyard, sitting on a reed couch 
upholstered with ghooral skins, he drew my attention to the 
condition of the door which two nights previously the leopard 
had attempted to break down, in which attempt it would 
undoubtedly have succeeded if he had not fortunately had 
some sawn timber in the house— intended for repairing the 
roof— which he had used to shore up the door from inside. 

The headman was old and crippled with rheumatism, so he sent 
his son to show me the kill while he made room in the house for 
myself and my men. 

I found the kill— a young cow in grand condition— lying on a 
flat bit of ground just above the cattle track, in an ideal 
position for setting up the gin-trap. Its back was against a 
tangle of wild rose-bushes, and its hooves were against a foot- 
high bank; while eating, the leopard had sat on the bank with 
its forepaws between the cow's legs. 

Having dug away the ground between the cow's legs and 
removed it to a distance, I set the trap where the leopard had 
placed his paws and covered it over with big green leaves. 

Then, after sprinkling on a layer of earth, I replaced the dead 
leaves, bits of dry sticks, and splinters of bone in the exact 
position between the cow's legs in which I had found them. Not 
one of a hundred human beings going to the kill would have 
noticed that the ground had in any way been disturbed, and a 
deadly trap set. 

My arrangements made to my satisfaction I retraced my steps 
arid climbed a tree half-way between the kill and the 
headman's house, where I would he handy if needed at the 
trap. 



Near sundown a pair of kalege pheasants and their brood of 
five chicks, which I had been watching for some time, suddenly 
took alarm and went scuttling down the hill, and a few seconds 
later a kakar came dashing towards me and after barking 
under my tree for a little while, went off up the hill on tiptoe. 
Nothing happened after that, and when it was getting too dark 
under the shade of the trees for me to see the sights of my rifle, 
I slipped off the tree and myself tiptoed away on rubber-shod 
feet towards the village. 

A hundred yards from the headman's house the track ran 
across an open glade, some thirty yards long and twenty yards 
wide. On the upper, hill side of the glade was a big rock. As I 
reached this open ground I felt I was being followed, and, 
determined to exploit the situation, I left the track and, taking 
two long steps over soft and spongy ground, lay down behind 
the rock, with only one eye showing in the direction of the kill. 

For ten minutes I lay on the wet ground. When daylight had all 
but gone I regained the path and, taking every precaution, 
covered the remaining distance to the headman's house. 

Once during the night the headman roused me from a sound 
sleep to tell me he had heard the leopard scratching on the 
door, and when I opened the door next morning I saw the pug- 
marks of the man-eater in the dust in front of it. These pug- 
marks I followed back to the glade, and found that the leopard 
had done just what I had done the previous evening. He had 
left the track where I had; had crossed the soft ground to the 
rock and, after regaining the track, had followed me to the 
house, round which he had walked several times. 

On leaving the house the leopard had gone back along the 
track, and as I followed his pug-marks towards the kill my 
hopes rose high, for up to that time I had not fully realized the 
degree of cunning that a man-eating leopard can acquire after 
eight years of close association with human beings. 

I left the track and approached from the high ground, and from 



a little distance away saw that the kill had gone, and that the 
ground where the trap had been buried was, except for two 
pug-marks, undisturbed. 

Sitting on the foot-high bank, as he had done the first night, the 
leopard had put both front paws between the cow's legs, but on 
this occasion he had spread them wide apart and rested them 
on the buried levers of the trap which, released, would have 
closed the great jaws. Here, safe from the trap, he had eaten 
his meal, and when he had done, he skirted round the flat 
ground and, getting hold of the cow by the head, had dragged 
it through the rose-thorns and rolled it down the hill, where 
fifty yards lower down it had fetched up against an oak sapling. 
Content with his night's work, the leopard had then gone along 
the cattle track, and after following him for a mile I lost his 
tracks on hard ground. 

There was no hope of the leopard returning to the kill. 

However, to salve my conscience for not having done so the 
previous night, I put a liberal dose of cyanide in the carcass of 
the cow. Truth to tell I hated the very thought of using poison 
then, and I hate it no less now. 

I visited the kill in the morning and found that a leopard had 
eaten all that portion of the cow that I had poisoned. So sure 
was I that the poison had been eaten by a leopard that had 
accidentally come across the kill, and not by the man-eater, 
that on my return to the village I told the headman that I would 
not stay to recover the leopard, though I would pay a hundred 
rupees to anyone who found it and took its skin to 
the patwari.A month later the reward was claimed, and the skin 
of a leopard which had been dead many days was buried by 
the patwari. 

It did not take my men long to pack up, and shortly after mid¬ 
day we started on our long journey back to Naini Tal. As we 
went down a narrow footpath to the Chatwapipal bridge a big 
rat snake leisurely crossed the path, and as I stood and 
watched it slip away Madho Singh, who was behind me, said. 



'There goes the evil spirit that has been responsible for your 
failure. 1 


My action in leaving Garhwal to the tender mercies of the man- 
eater may appear heartless to you— it did so to me— and was 
adversely criticized in the press, for the leopard at that time 
was daily mentioned in the Indian papers. In extenuation I 
would urge that an effort entailing great strain cannot be 
indefinitely sustained. There were twenty-four hours in every 
day of the many weeks I spent in Garhwal, and time and time 
again after sitting up all night, I walked endless miles next day, 
visiting distant villages from which reports had come of 
unsuccessful attacks by the man-eater. On many moonlit nights, 
when sitting in an uncomfortable position physical endurance 
had reached its limit, and when sitting where it would have 
been easy for the leopard to have got at me I had no longer 
been able to keep my eyes open. I had for hours walked the 
roads which were alone open to me and to the leopard, trying 
every trick I knew of to outwit my adversary, and the man-eater 
had, with luck beyond his deserts or with devilish cunning, 
avoided the bullet that a press of my finger would have sent 
into him, for on retracing my steps in the morning after these 
night excursions I had found from the pug-marks on the road 
that I was right in assuming I had been closely followed. To 
know that one is being followed at night— no matter how 
bright the moon may be— by a man-eater intent on securing a 
victim, gives one an inferiority complex that is very unnerving, 
and that is not mitigated by repetition. 

Tired out in mind and in body, my longer stay at Rudraprayag 
would not have profited the people of Garhwal, and it might 
have cost me my own life. Knowing that the temporary 
abandonment of my self-imposed task would be severely 
criticized by the press, but that what I was now doing was 
right, I plodded on towards my distant home, having assured 
the people of Garhwal that I would return to help them as soon 
as it was possible for me to do so. 



Fishing Interlude 

I LEFT THE SCENE OF MY failure, weary and dispirited, in the 
late autumn of 1925, and returned to continue my labour, 
refreshed and full of hope, in the early spring of 1926. 

On this my second visit to Garhwal in pursuit of the man-eater, 

I travelled by train to Kotdwara and went from there by foot to 
Pauri, thus saving eight days on the journey At Pauri, Ibbotson 
joined me and accompanied me to Rudraprayag. 

During my three months' absence from Garhwal the man-eater 
had killed ten human beings, and during these three months no 
attempt had been made by the terror-stricken inhabitants to 
kill the leopard. 

The last of these ten kills— the victim was a small boy— had 
taken place on the left bank of the Alaknanda, two days before 
our arrival at Rudraprayag. We had received telegraphic news 
of this kill at Pauri, and though we had travelled as fast as it 
was possible for us to do, we were disappointed to learn from 
the patwari, who was awaiting our arrival at the Inspection 
Bungalow, that the leopard disposed of the entire kill the 
previous night, leaving nothing of its small victim over which 
we could sit. 

The boy had been killed at midnight in a village four miles from 
Rudraprayag, and as it was unlikely that the leopard had 
crossed the river after his undisturbed feed, we took steps 
immediately on our arrival to close the two suspension bridges. 

During the winter Ibbotson had organized a very efficient 
intelligence service throughout the area in which the man-eater 
was operating. If in this area a dog, goat, cow, or human being 
was killed, or an attempt made to force open a door, news of 
the occurrence was conveyed to us by the service, and in this 
way we were able to keep in constant touch with the man-eater. 
Hundreds of false rumours of alleged attacks by the man-eater 
were brought to us, entailing endless miles of walking, but this 
was only to be expected, for in an area in which an established 



man-eater is operating everyone suspects their own shadows, 
and every sound heard at night is attributed to the man-eater. 

One of these rumours concerned a man by the name of Galtu, a 
resident of Kunda, a village seven miles from Rudraprayag on 
the right bank of the Alaknanda. Galtu left the village in the 
evening to spend the night in his cattle shed a mile away from 
the village, and when his son went to the shed next morning he 
found his father's blanket half in and half out of the door of the 
shed, and in a patch of soft ground nearby he found what he 
thought was drag mark, and near it the pug-marks of the man- 
eater. Returning to the village he raised an alarm, and while 
sixty men went off to search for the body, four men were 
dispatched to Rudraprayag to inform us. Ibbotson and I were 
beating a hillside on the left bank of the river for the man-eater 
when the men arrived, and as I was convinced that the leopard 
was on our side of the river, and that there was no truth in the 
rumour that Galtu had been killed, Ibbotson sent 
a patwari back to Kunda with the four men, with instructions to 
make a personal search and report back to us. Next evening we 
received the patwari's report, with a sketch of the pug-marks in 
the soft earth near the door of the shed. The report stated that 
an all-day search of the surrounding country, with two hundred 
men, had not resulted in finding Galtu's remains, and that the 
search would be continued. The sketch showed six circles, the 
inner one as large as a plate, with five equally spaced circles 
round it, each the size of a tea cup; all the circles had been 
made with a compass. Five days later, and just as Ibbotson and 
I were setting out to sit up on the tower of the bridge, a 
procession came up to the bungalow led by an irate man who 
was protesting loudly that he had committed no offence that 
justified his being arrested and brought to Rudraprayag. The 
irate man was Galtu. After we had pacified him, he gave us his 
story. It appeared that just as he was leaving his house on the 
night he was alleged to have been carried off by the man-eater, 
his son arrived and informed him that he had paid Rs 100 for a 
pair of bullocks which Galtu asserted were not worth more 



than Rs 70. The wanton waste of good money had so angered 
him that, after sleeping the night in the cattle shed, he had got 
up early next morning and gone to a village ten miles away, 
where a married daughter of his was living. On his return to his 
village that morning, he had been arrested by the patwari, and 
he wanted to know what crime he had committed that justified 
his arrest. It was some little time before he saw the humour of 
the situation, but once having done so, he laughed as heartily 
as any of the assembled throng at the thought of an important 
person like a patwari, and two hundred of his friends, 
searching for five days for his remains, what time he was 
cooling off in a village ten miles away. 

Ibbotson was averse to lying all night on the wind-swept tower 
of the Rudraprayag suspension bridge, and as wood and 
carpenters were available, he had a platform built in the arch 
of the tower, and on this platform we sat for the five nights 
Ibbotson was able to spend at Rudraprayag. 

After Ibbotson's departure the leopard killed one dog, four 
goats, and two cows. The dog and goats had been eaten out on 
the nights on which they had been killed, but I sat over each of 
the cows for two nights. On the second night on which I was 
sitting up over the first cow, the leopard came, but just as I was 
raising my rifle and preparing to switch on the torch I had 
provided myself with, a woman in the house adjoining the one I 
was sitting in, thumped on the door preparatory to opening it, 
and unfortunately frightened the leopard away. 

No human beings had been killed during this period, but a 
woman and her baby had been badly mauled. The leopard had 
forced open the door of the room in which she was sleeping 
with her baby, and seizing her arm had attempted to drag her 
out of the room. The woman fortunately was stout of heart, and 
had not fainted or lost her wits, and after the leopard- 
dragging her along the floor— had backed out of the room, she 
shut the door on it, and escaped with a badly lacerated arm 
and several deep wounds on her breast, while the baby escaped 



with one head wound. I sat in this room for the following two 
nights, but the leopard did not return. 

I was returning one day towards the latter end of March, after 
visiting a village on the Kedarnath pilgrim route, when, as I 
approached a spot where the road runs close alongside the 
Mandakini river, and where there is a water fall ten to twelve 
feet high, I saw a number of men sitting on the rock at the head 
of the fall on the far side of the river, armed with a triangular 
net attached to a long bamboo pole. The roar of the water 
prevented conversation, so leaving the road I sat down on the 
rocks on my side of the fall, to have a rest and a smoke— for I 
had walked for that day— and to see what the men were doing. 

Presently one of the men got to his feet, and as he pointed 
down excitedly into the foaming white water at the foot of the 
fall, two of his companions manning the long pole held the 
triangular net close to the fall. A large shoal of mahseer fish, 
varying in size from five to fifty pounds, were attempting to 
leap the fall. One of these fish, about ten pounds in weight, 
leapt clear of the fall and when falling back was expertly 
caught in the net. After the fish had been extracted and placed 
in a basket, the net was again held out close to the fall. I 
watched the sport for about an hour, during which time the 
men caught four fish, all about the same size— ten pounds. 

On my previous visit to Rudraprayag I had been informed by 
the chowkidar in charge of the Inspection Bungalow that there 
was good fishing in the spring— before the snow-water came 
down— in both the Alaknanda and Mandakini rivers, so I had 
come armed on this my second visit with a fourteen-foot split 
cane salmon rod, a silex reel with two hundred and fifty yards 
of line, a few stout traces, and an assortment of home-made 
brass spoons varying in size from one to two inches. 

The following morning— as no news had come in of the man- 
eater— I set off for the waterfall with my rod and tackle. 

No fish were leaping the fall as they had been doing the 



previous day; and the men on the far side of the river were 
sitting in a group round a small fire smoking a hookah which 
was passing from hand to hand. They watched me with 
interest. 

Below the waterfall was a pool thirty to forty yards wide, 
flanked on both sides by a wall of rock, and about two hundred 
yards long, one hundred yards of which was visible from where 
I stood at the head of the pool. The water in this beautiful and 
imposing pool was crystal-clear. 

The rock face at the head of the pool rose sheer up out of the 
water to a height of twelve feet, and after keeping at this 
height for twenty yards, sloped gradually upwards to a height 
of a hundred feet. It was not possible to get down to water level 
anywhere on my side of the pool, nor would it be possible, or 
profitable, to follow a fish— assuming that I hooked one— 
along the bank, for at the top of the high ground there were 
trees and bushes, and at the tail of the pool the river cascaded 
down in a foaming torrent to its junction with the Alaknanda. 

To land a fish in this pool would be a difficult and a hazardous 
task, but the crossing of that bridge could be deferred until the 
fish had been hooked— and I had not yet put together my rod. 

On my side of the pool the water— shot through with millions 
of small bubbles— was deep, and from about half-way across a 
shingle bottom was showing, over which four to six feet of 
water was flowing. Above this shingle bottom, every stone and 
pebble of which was visible in the clear water, a number of fish, 
ranging in size from three to ten pounds, were slowly moving 
upstream. 

As I watched these fish, standing on the rocks twelve feet 
above the water with a two-inch spoon mounted with a single 
strong treble hook in my hand, a flight of fingerlings flashed 
out of the deep water and went skimming over the shingle 
bottom, hotly pursued by three big mahseer. Using the good 
salmon rod as friend Hardy had never intended that it should 
be used— and as it had been used on many previous occasions 



— I slung the spoon out, and in my eagerness over-estimated 
the distance, with the result that the spoon struck the rock on 
the far side of the pool, about two feet above the water. The 
falling of the spoon into the water coincided with the arrival of 
the fingerlings at the rock, and the spoon had hardly touched 
the water, when it was taken by the leading mahseer. 

Striking with a long line from an elevated position entails a 
very heavy strain, but my good rod stood the strain, and the 
strong treble hook was firmly fixed in the mahseer's mouth. For 
a moment or two the fish did not appear to realize what had 
happened as, standing perpendicularly in the water with his 
white belly towards me, he shook his head from side to side, 
and then, possibly frightened by the dangling spoon striking 
against his head, he gave a mighty splash and went tearing 
downstream, scattering in all directions the smaller fish that 
were lying on the shingle bottom. 

In his first run the mahseer ripped a hundred yards of line off 
the reel, and after a moment's check carried on for another 
fifty yards. There was plenty of line still on the reel, but the fish 
had now gone round the bend and was getting dangerously 
near the tail of the pool. Alternately easing and tightening the 
strain on the line, I eventually succeeded in turning his head 
upstream, and having done so, very gently pulled him round 
the bend, into the hundred yards of water I was overlooking. 

Just below me a projection of rock had formed a backwater, and 
into this backwater the fish, after half an hour's game fight, 
permitted himself to be drawn. 

I had now very definitely reached my bridge and had just 
regretfully decided that, as there was no way of crossing it, the 
fish would have to be cut adrift, when a shadow fell across the 
rock beside me. Peering over the rock into the backwater, the 
new arrival remarked that it was a very big fish, and in the 
same breath asked what I was going to do about it. When I told 
him that it would not be possible to draw the fish up the face of 
the rock, and that therefore the only thing to do was to cut it 



free, he said, 'Wait, sahib, I will fetch my brother/ His brother 
— a long and lanky stripling with dancing eyes— had quite 
evidently been cleaning out a cow shed when summoned, so 
telling him to go upstream and wash himself lest he should slip 
on the smooth rock, I held council with the elder man. 

Starting from where we were standing, a crack, a few inches 
wide, ran irregularly down the face of the rock, ending a foot 
above the water in a ledge some six inches wide. The plan we 
finally agreed on was that the stripling— who presently 
returned with his arms and legs glistening with water— should 
go down to the ledge, while the elder brother went down the 
crack far enough to get hold of the stripling's left hand, while I 
lay on the rock holding the elder brother's other hand. Before 
embarking on the plan I asked the brothers whether they knew 
how to handle a fish and whether they could swim, and 
received the laughing answer that they had handled fish and 
swum in the river from childhood. 

The snag in the plan was that I could not hold the rod and at 
the same time make a link in the chain. However, some risk had 
to be taken, so I put the rod down and held the line in my hand, 
and when the brothers had taken up position I sprawled on the 
rock and, reaching down, got hold of the elder brother's hand. 
Then very gently I drew the fish towards the rock, holding the 
line alternately with my left hand and with my teeth. There was 
no question that the stripling knew how to handle a fish, for 
before the fish had touched the rock, he had inserted his thumb 
into one side of the gills and his fingers into the other, getting a 
firm grip on the fish's throat. Up to this point the fish had been 
quite amenable, but on having its throat seized, it lashed out, 
and for seconds it appeared that the three of us would go 
headlong into the river. 

Both brothers were bare-footed, and when I had been relieved 
of the necessity of holding the line and was able to help with 
both hands, they turned and, facing the rock, worked their way 
up with their toes, while I pulled lustily from on top. 



When the fish at last had been safely landed, I asked the 
brothers it they ate fish, and on receiving their eager answer 
that they most certainty did, when they could get any, I told 
them I would give them the fish we had just landed— 
a mahseer in grand condition weighing a little over thirty 
pounds— if they would help me to land another fish for my 
men. To this they very readily agreed. 

The treble had bitten deep into the leathery underlip of 
the mahseer, and as I cut it out, the brothers watched 
interestedly. When the hook was free, they asked if they might 
have a look at it. Three hooks in one, such a thing had never 
been seen in their village. The bit of bent brass of course acted 
as a sinker. With what were the hooks baited? Why should fish 
want to eat brass? And was it really brass, or some kind of 
hardened bait? When the spoon, and the trace with its three 
swivels, had been commented on and marvelled at, I made the 
brothers sit down and watch while I set about catching the 
second fish. 

The biggest fish in the pool were at the foot of the fall, but here 
in the foaming white water, in addition to mahseer were some 
very big goonch, a fish that takes a spoon of dead bait very 
readily, and which is responsible for 90 per cent of the tackle 
lost in our hill rivers through its annoying habit of diving to the 
bottom of the pool when hooked and getting its head under a 
rock from where it is always difficult, and often impossible, to 
dislodge it. 

No better spot than the place from where I had made my first 
cast was available, so here I again took up my position, with 
rod in hand and spoon held ready for casting. 

The fish on the shingle bottom had been disturbed while I was 
playing the mahseer and by our subsequent movements on the 
face of the rock but were now beginning to return, and 
presently an exclamation from the brothers, and an excited 
pointing of fingers, drew my attention to a big fish downstream 
where the shingle bottom ended and the deep water began. 



Before I was able to make a cast, the fish turned and 
disappeared in the deep water, but a little later it reappeared, 
and as it came into the shallow water I made a cast, but owing 
to the line being wet the cast fell short. The second cast was 
beautifully placed and beautifully timed, the spoon striking the 
water exactly where I wanted it to. Waiting for a second to give 
the spoon time to sink, I started to wind in the line, giving the 
spoon just the right amount of spin, and as I drew it along in 
little jerks, the mahseer shot forward, and next moment, with 
the hook firmly fixed in his mouth, jumped clean out of the 
water, fell back with a great splash, and went madly 
downstream, much to the excitement of the spectators, for the 
men on the far bank had been watching the proceedings as 
intently as the brothers. 

As the reel spun round and the line paid out, the brothers— 
now standing one on either side of me— urged me not to let the 
fish go down the run at the trail of the pool. Easier said than 
done, for it is not possible to stop the first mad rush of 
a mahseer of any size with risking certain break, or the tearing 
away of the hook-hold. Our luck was in, or else the fish feared 
the run, for when there was less than fifty yards of line on the 
reel he checked, and though he continued to fight gamely he 
was eventually drawn round the bend, and into the little 
backwater at the foot of the rock. 

The landing of this second fish was not as difficult as the 
landing of the first had been, for we each knew our places on 
the rock and exactly what to do. 

Both fish were the same length, but the second was a little 
heavier than the first, and while the elder brother set off in 
triumph for his village with his fish carried over his shoulder- 
threaded on a grass cable he had made— the stripling begged 
to be allowed to accompany me back to the Inspection 
Bungalow, and to carry both my fish and my rod. Having in the 
days of long ago been a boy myself, and having had a brother 
who fished, there was no need for the stripling when making 



his request to have said, 'If you will let me carry both the fish 
and the rod, and will walk a little distance behind me, sahib, all 
the people who see me on the road, and in the bazaar, will 
think that I have caught this great fish, the like of which they 
have never seen. 1 



Death of a Goat 

IBBOTSON RETURNED FROM PAURI ON the last day of 
March, and the following morning, while we were having 
breakfast, we received a report that a leopard had called very 
persistently the previous night near a village to the north-west 
of Rudraprayag, about a mile from the place where we had 
killed the leopard in the gin-trap. 

Half a mile to the north of the village, and on the shoulder of 
the great mountain, there was a considerable area of rough 
and broken ground where there were enormous rocks and 
caves, and deep holes in which the locals said their forefathers 
had quarried copper. Over the whole of this area there was 
scrub jungle, heavy in some places and light in others, 
extending down the hillside to within half a mile of the terraced 
fields above the village. 

I had long suspected that the man-eater used this ground as a 
hideout when he was in the vicinity of Rudraprayag, and I had 
frequently climbed to a commanding position above the broken 
ground in the hope of finding him basking on the rocks in the 
early morning sun, for leopards are very fond of doing this in a 
cold climate, and it is a very common way of shooting them, for 
all that is needed is a little patience, and accuracy of aim. 

After an early lunch Ibbotson and I set out armed with our -275 
rifles, and accompanied by one of Ibbotson's men carrying a 
short length of rope. At the village we purchased a young male 
goat— the leopard having killed all the goats that I had 
purchased from time to time. 

From the village, a rough goat track ran straight up the hill to 
the edge of the broken ground, where it turned left, and after 
running across the face of the hill for a hundred yards carried 
on round the shoulder of the mountain. The track where it ran 
across the hill was bordered on the upper side by scattered 
bushes, and on the steep lower side by short grass. 

Having tied the goat to a peg firmly driven into the ground at 



the bend in the track, about ten yards below the scrub jungle, 
we went down the hill for a hundred and fifty yards to where 
there were some big rocks, behind which we concealed 
ourselves. The goat was one of the best callers I have ever 
heard, and while his shrill and piercing bleat continued there 
was no necessity for us to watch him, for he had been very 
securely tied and there was no possibility of the leopard 
carrying him away 

The sun— a fiery red ball— was a hand's breadth from the 
snow mountains above Kedarnath when we took up our 
position behind the rocks, and half an hour later, when we had 
been in shadow for a few minutes, the goat suddenly stopped 
calling. Creeping to the side of the rock and looking through a 
screen of grass, I saw the goat with ears cocked, looking up 
towards the bushes; as I watched, the goat shook his head, and 
backed to the full length of the rope. 

The leopard had undoubtedly come, attracted by the calling of 
the goat, and that he had not pounced before the goat became 
aware of his presence was proof that he was suspicious. 
Ibbotson's aim would be more accurate than mine, for his rifle 
was fitted with a telescopic sight, so I made room for him, and 
as he lay down and raised his rifle I whispered to him examine 
carefully the bushes in the direction in which the goat was 
looking, for I felt sure that if the goat could see the leopard— 
and all the indications were that it could— Ibbotson should also 
be able to see it through his powerful telescope. For minutes 
Ibbotson kept his eye to the telescope and then shook his head, 
laid down the rifle, and made room for me. 

The goat was standing in exactly the same position in which I 
had last seen it, and taking direction from it I fixed the 
telescope on the same bush at which it was looking. The flicker 
of an eyelid, or the very least movement of ear or even 
whiskers, would have been visible through the telescope, but 
though I also watched for minutes I too could see nothing. 

When I took my eye away from the telescope I noted that the 



light was rapidly fading, and that the goat now showed as a 
red-and-white blur on the hillside. We had a long way to go and 
waiting longer would be both useless and dangerous, so getting 
to my feet I told Ibbotson it was time for us to make a move. 

Going up to the goat— who from the time he had stopped 
bleating had not made a sound— we freed it from the peg, and 
with the man leading it we set off for the village. The goat quite 
evidently had never had a rope round its neck before and 
objected violently to being led, so I told the man to take the 
rope off— my experience being that when a goat is freed after 
having been tied up in the jungle, through fear or for want of 
companionship it follows at heel like a dog. This goat, however, 
had ideas of its own, and no sooner had the man removed the 
rope from its neck, than it turned and ran up the track. 

It was too good a calling goat to abandon— it had attracted the 
leopard once, and might do so again. Moreover, we had only a 
few hours previously paid good money for it, so we in turn ran 
up the track in hot pursuit. At the bend, the goat turned to the 
left, and we lost sight of it. Keeping to the track, as the goat 
had done, we went to the shoulder of the hill where a 
considerable extent of the hill, clothed in short grass, was 
visible, and as the goat was nowhere in sight we decided it had 
taken a short cut back to the village, and started to retrace our 
steps. I was leading, and as we got half-way along the hundred 
yards of track, bordered on the upper side by scattered bushes 
and on the steep lower side by short grass, I saw something 
white on the track in front of me. The light had nearly gone, 
and on cautiously approaching the white object I found it was 
the goat— laid head and tail on the narrow track, in the only 
position in which it could have been laid to prevent it from 
rolling down the steep hillside. 

Blood was oozing from its throat, and when I placed my hand 
on it the muscles were still twitching. 

It was as though the man-eater— for no other leopard would 
have killed the goat and laid it on the track— had said, 'Here, if 



you want your goat so badly take it; and as it is now dark and 
you have a long way to go, we will see which of you lives to 
reach the village . 1 

I do not think all three of us would have reached the village 
alive if I had not, very fortunately, had a full box of matches 
with me (Ibbotson at that time was a non-smoker). Striking a 
match and casting an anxious look all round and taking a few 
hurried steps, and then again striking another match, we 
stumbled down the rough track until we got to within calling 
distance of the village. Then, at our urgent summons, men with 
lanterns and pine torches came up to meet us. 

We had left the goat lying where the leopard had placed it, and 
when I returned at a daybreak next morning I found the pug- 
marks of the man-eater where he had followed us down to the 
village, and I found the goat untouched and lying just as we 
had left it. 



Cyanide Poisoning 

AS I WAS RETURNING TO THE Inspection Bungalow after 
visiting the goat that had been killed the previous night, I was 
informed in the village that my presence was urgently needed 
at Rudraprayag, for news had just been received that the man- 
eater had killed a human being the previous night. My 
informants were unable to give me any particulars as to where 
the kill had taken place, but as the pug-marks of the man-eater 
showed that, after following us to the village, it had gone back 
up the goat track and turned right at the bend, I assumed— 
rightly, as I later found— that the leopard, after failing to bag 
one of us, had secured a victim farther up the mountain-side. 

At the bungalow I found Ibbotson in conversation with a man 
by the name of Nand Ram. Nand Ram's village was about four 
miles from where we had sat the previous evening. Half a mile 
above this village and on the far side of a deep ravine, a man of 
the depressed class, named Gawiya, had cleared a small area of 
forest land and built himself a house in which he lived with his 
mother, wife, and three children. At daybreak that morning, 
Nand Ram had heard the wailing of women from the direction 
of Gawiya's house and, on his shouting out and asking what 
was wrong, he had been informed that 'the man of the house' 
had been carried off by the man-eater half an hour previously. 
With this information Nand Ram had come hot-foot to the 
Inspection Bungalow. 

Ibbotson had had the Arab and the English mare saddled, and 
after we had eaten a good meal we set out, with Nand Ram to 
show us the way. There were no roads on the hill, only goat and 
cattle tracks, and as the big English mare found the hairpin 
bends on these tracks difficult to negotiate we sent the horses 
back and did the rest of the hot and steep climb on foot. 

Arrived at the little isolated clearing in the forest, the two 
distracted women— who appeared to be nursing the hope that 
the 'man of the house' might still be alive— showed us where 
Gawiya had been sitting near the door of the house when the 



leopard had seized him. The leopard had caught the 
unfortunate man by the throat, thus preventing him from 
making any sound, and after dragging him for a hundred yards 
had killed him. Then he had carried him for four hundred yards 
to a little hollow surrounded by dense brushwood. The wailing 
of the women and the shouting of Nand Ram had evidently 
disturbed the leopard at his meal, for he had only eaten the 
throat and jaw, and a small portion of one shoulder and thigh. 

There were no trees within sight of the kill on which we could 
sit, so we poisoned the kill with cyanide at the three places 
where the leopard had eaten, and as it was now getting 
towards evening we took up position on a hill several hundred 
yards away, from where we could over look the hollow in which 
the kill was lying. The leopard was undoubtedly in the dense 
brushwood, but though we lay in our concealed position and 
watched for two hours, we saw nothing of him. At dusk we lit 
the lantern we had provided ourselves with, and went back to 
the bungalow. 

We were up very early next morning, and it was just getting 
light when we again sat down on the hill over-looking the 
hollow. We saw and heard nothing, and when the sun had been 
up an hour, we went to the kill, the leopard had not touched the 
three places where we had buried the poison, but had eaten 
the other shoulder and leg, and had then carried the body away 
for a short distance and hidden it under some bushes. 

Again there were no trees overlooking the kill on which we 
could sit, and after a prolonged discussion we eventually 
decided that while Ibbotson went down the hill for a mile to a 
village where there was a big mango tree, in which he could 
make himself a machan and spend the night, I would sit about 
four hundred yards from the kill, over a village path on which 
the previous day we had seen the pug-marks of the man-eater. 

The tree I selected to sit in was a rhododendron which many 
years previously had been cut about fifteen feet above ground. 
Stout branches had grown out from the cut, and sitting on the 



old stump surrounded by the branches I had a perfect seat and 
perfect concealment. 

Facing me was a steep well-wooded hill with a dense 
undergrowth of bracken and dwarf bamboo. Running across 
the face of the hill east and west was a well-used footpath; the 
rhododendron tree was growing about ten feet below this 
footpath. 

From my seat in the tree I had an uninterrupted view of a 
length of about ten yards of the path, which to my left crossed 
a ravine and carried on at the same level on the far side, and to 
my right, and some three hundred yards farther on, passed a 
little below the bushes where the kill was lying. There was no 
water in the ravine where the path crossed it, but thirty yards 
lower down and immediately below, and three or four yards 
from, the root of my tree, there were several small pools— the 
start of a little spring which lower down became a stream 
providing drinking water to the villagers and irrigation for their 
crops. 

The ten yards of path of which I had an uninterrupted view was 
joined at right-angles by a path coming down the hill from the 
house three hundred yards above me where Gawiya had been 
killed. Thirty yards up this path there was a bend, and from this 
point a small depression ran down to the lower path— the 
points where the depression started on the upper path and 
ended on the lower were not in my view. 

There was no need for a torch, for it was a brilliant moonlit 
night, and if the leopard came along the level path or down the 
path from the house— as its pug-marks showed it had done the 
previous day— I should get an easy shot at a range of from 
twenty to forty feet. 

I had gone down the hill a short distance with Ibbotson, and 
then a little before sunset had taken up my position on the tree. 
A few minutes later three kalege pheasants— a cock and two 
hens— came down the hill, and after drinking at the spring 



went back the way they had come. On both occasions they had 
passed under my tree, and that they had not seen me was proof 
that my hide was a good one. 

The early part of the night was silent, but at eight o'clock 
a kakar started barking in the direction of the kill. The leopard 
had arrived, and I was convinced he had not gone to the kill 
along either of the paths I was watching. After barking for a 
minutes the kakar stopped, and thereafter the night was again 
silent up to ten o'clock, when the kakar again barked. The 
leopard had been at the kill for two hours— sufficient time for 
him to have had a good meal, and for him to have poisoned 
himself several times over. And there was a good chance of his 
having done so, for on this second night the kill had been very 
effectively poisoned, the cyanide having been buried deep in 
the victim's flesh. 

Without closing an eye I sat watching the hill in front of me, 
where the moonlight was so brilliant that I could clearly see 
every blade of grass, and at 2 a.m. I heard the leopard coming 
down the path from the direction of the house. I had scattered 
dry leaves on this path, and also on the lower path, with the 
object of getting some warning of the leopard's approach, and 
that he was now walking carelessly over these leaves, and not 
making any attempt at silence, filled me with hope— though I 
expected within the next few seconds to put a bullet into him— 
that all was not well with him. 

At the bend in the path the leopard made a short pause, and 
then leaving the path entered the little depression and followed 
it down to the lower path, on reaching which he again paused. 

I had sat without movement for hours with my hands on the 
rifle lying across my knees, and as I was convinced that he 
would come along the path, I decided to let him pass in front of 
me, and when there was no longer any danger of his seeing the 
movement raise the rifle to my shoulder, and hit him where I 
wanted to. For seconds I watched the path, expecting to see his 
head appear from behind the screen of branches, and then. 



when tension was becoming unbearable, I heard him jump 
down off the path and come diagonally across the hill towards 
my tree. For a moment I thought he had in some mysterious 
way become aware of my presence on the tree and, not liking 
the flavour of his last kill, was intent on securing another 
human victim. His object, however, in leaving the path was not 
to try to get at me but to take a short cut down to the spring, 
for he passed the foot of the tree without a pause, and next 
second I heard him eagerly and noisily lapping water. 

From the leopard's behaviour on the hill, and from the way he 
was now drinking, I was convinced he had poisoned himself, 
but not having had any previous experience of the effect of 
cyanide, I did not know how long the poison would take to act. 
For ten minutes after the leopard had stopped drinking, and 
just as I was beginning to hope that he had died at the spring, I 
heard him going up the hill on the far side of the ravine, all 
sound ceasing when he regained the path which carried on 
round the shoulder of the hill. 

At no time, either when the leopard was coming down the path, 
coming down the depression, coming across the hill to the foot 
of my tree, when drinking, or going up the hill on the far side of 
the ravine, had I seen him, for either by accident or intent he 
had kept under cover to which not a glint of moonlight had 
penetrated. 

There was now no hope of my getting a shot, but this was not 
of much account if the poison was as potent as the doctor in 
Naini Tal had claimed that it was. 

I sat on for the rest of the night, watching the path and 
listening for sounds. At daylight Ibbotson returned, and while 
we brewed ourselves a very welcome cup of tea I told him of 
the night's happenings. 

On visiting the kill we found that the leopard had eaten the leg 
from which he had taken a small portion two nights previously, 
and in which we had buried a full dose of poison, and that he 



had in addition eaten two other doses of poison, one from the 
left shoulder and the other from the back. 

It was now necessary to make a search for the leopard, and for 
this purpose the patwari, who had returned with Ibbotson, set 
off to collect men. At about midday the patwari returned with 
two hundred men, and with these we made a line and beat the 
whole side of the hill in the direction in which the leopard had 
gone. 

Half a mile from where the leopard had quenched his thirst, 
and in the direct line in which I had heard him going away, 
there were some big rocks at the foot of which there was a 
cave extending far into the hill, with an opening large enough 
to admit a leopard. Near the mouth of this cave the leopard had 
scratched up the ground, and rid himself of his victim's toes— 
which he had swallowed whole. 

Willing hands brought loose stones from the hillside, and when 
we left the cave we had sealed it beyond all possibility of any 
leopard that might be lurking in it escaping. 

Next morning I returned with a roll of one-inch wire-netting 
and a number of iron tent-pegs, and, after removing the stones, 
very effectively wired up the mouth of the cave. Thereafter for 
the following ten days I visited the cave morning and evening, 
and as during this period no news of the man-eater came in 
from any village on the left bank of the Alaknanda, my hopes 
each day grew stronger that on my next visit I would surely get 
some indication that the leopard had died in the cave. 

On the tenth morning, when I returned from my visit to the 
cave— where I had found the netting undisturbed— Ibbotson 
greeted me with the news that a woman had been killed the 
previous night in a village five miles away, and about a mile 
above the Rudraprayag-Badrinath pilgrim road. 

Quite evidently cyanide was not the right poison for an animal 
that had the reputation of thriving on, and being stimulated by, 
arsenic and strychnine. That the leopard had eaten the cyanide 



there could be no doubt whatever, nor was there any doubt that 
he had entered the cave, for his hairs were adhering to the 
rock where his back had come in contact with it when entering 
the cave. 

An overdose might account for the poison not having had the 
desired effect and a second opening somewhere farther up the 
hill might account for his escape from the cave. Even so, it was 
no longer any matter of surprise to me— who had only been 
acquainted with the leopard for a few short months— that the 
people of Garhwal, who had lived in close and intimate 
association with him for eight long years, should credit him— 
animal or spirit— with supernatural powers, and that they 
should cling to the belief that nothing but fire would rid them 
of this evil spirit. 



Touch and Go 

NEWS THAT IS OF IMPORTANCE TO every individual travels 
fast, and during the past ten days everyone in Garhwal had 
heard of the poisoning of the man-eater, and of our hope that 
we had sealed it up in a cave. It was natural therefore for risks 
to have been taken, and quite evidently the leopard, having 
recovered from the effects of the poison and found a way out of 
the cave, had found the first person who was taking a risk. 

We had the day before us, for I had returned early from my visit 
to the cave, and after breakfast, mounted on Ibbotson's 
surefooted horses and carrying our rifles, we set out for the 
village where the woman was reported to have been killed. 

After a fast ride up the pilgrim road we took a track that went 
diagonally across the hill, and a mile along this track, where 
the path from the village joined it, there were signs of a 
struggle and a big pool of blood. 

The headman, and relatives of the victim, were waiting for us 
at the village, and they showed us where the leopard had 
seized the woman as she was in the act of closing the door of 
her house behind her. From this point the leopard had dragged 
the woman along on her back for a hundred yards to the 
junction of the tracks, where he had released his hold, and 
after a violent struggle had killed her. The people in the village 
had heard the woman's screams as she was being dragged 
along the ground and as she was struggling for her life with the 
leopard, but had been too frightened to render any help. 

When the woman was dead, the leopard had picked her up and 
carried her over some waste land, across an open ravine a 
hundred yards wide, and up the hill on the far side for another 
two hundred yards. There were no drag marks, but the blood 
trail was easy to follow, and it led us to a flat bit of ground, four 
feet wide and twenty feet long. On the upper side of this 
narrow strip of ground there was a perpendicular bank eight 
feet high with a stunted medlar-tree growing on it, and on the 



lower side of the narrow strip the hill fell steeply away and 
growing on it was a wild rose-bush, which had reached up and 
smothered the medlar-tree. 

Lying huddled up between the steep bank and the rose-bush, 
with her head against the bank, with every vestige of clothing 
stripped from her, and with her naked body flecked with white 
rose-petals that had fallen from above was the kill— an old 
grey-haired lady, seventy years of age. 

For this pitiful kill leopard would have to pay with his life, and 
after a short council of war, Ibbotson, leading the spare horse, 
returned to Rudraprayag for the things we needed, while I set 
off with my rifle to see whether it was possible to make contact 
with the man-eater in daylight. 

This part of the country was new to me, and the first thing to 
do was to reconnoitre the ground. I had already noted while at 
the village that the hill went steeply up from the ravine to a 
height of four to five thousand feet; that about two thousand 
feet of the top of the hill was clothed with dense oak and pine 
forest, below which was an open stretch of short grass about 
half a mile wide, and that below the grass was scrub jungle. 

Keeping now to the edge of the grass and scrub jungle I went 
round the shoulder of the hill, and found in front of me a wide 
depression, extending for half a mile down to the pilgrim road, 
and evidently caused in the days of long ago by a landslide. 
Beyond this depression, which was about a hundred yards wide 
at the upper end and about three hundred yards wide where it 
met the road, the ground was open. The ground in the 
depression was damp, and growing on this damp ground were 
a number or big trees, and under the tree a dense growth of 
scrub jungle. At the upper end of the depression was a cliff of 
overhanging rock, varying in height from twenty to forty feet, 
and about a hundred yards long; half-way along the cliff was a 
deep cleft a few feet wide, down which a tiny stream was 
trickling. Above the rocks was a narrow belt of scrub jungle, 
and above that again, open grassland. 



I had reconnoitred the ground with care, for I did not want the 
leopard— which I was convinced was lying up in the depression 
— to be aware of my presence before it suited me. It was now 
necessary to find approximately where the leopard was most 
likely to be lying up, and to gain this information I went back to 
the kill. 

We had been told in the village that it had got light shortly after 
the woman had been killed, and as it must have taken the 
leopard some little time to effect the kill, carry his victim four 
hundred yards, and eat a portion of it, it was reasonable to 
assume that he had left the spot where he had hidden the kill 
when day was fully established. 

The hill on which the kill was lying was in full view of the 
village, in which at this hour there must had been considerable 
movement; the leopard therefore on leaving the kill would very 
naturally had kept to cover as far as was possible, and working 
on this assumption, and also because the ground was too hard 
to show pug-marks, I set out to follow him along the line I 
assumed he had taken. 

When I had covered half a mile and was out of view of the 
village and was approaching the depression, I was gratified to 
find that I had followed on the leopard's tracks foot by foot, for 
in the lee of a bush where there was some loose earth, I found 
where he had been lying for several hours. His pug-marks 
when leaving this spot showed that he had entered the 
depression about fifty yards below the cliff of rock. 

For half an hour I lay where the leopard had lain, watching the 
small area of tree and scrub jungle in front of me in the hope 
that the leopard would make some slight movement and give 
away his position. 

After I had been watching for a few minutes a movement 
among the dead leaves attracted my attention, and presently 
two scimitar babblers came into view industriously turning 
over the leaves, looking for grubs. Where carnivores are 



concerned, these birds are among the most reliable informants 
in the jungle, and I hoped later to make use of this pair to help 
in locating the leopard. 

No movement had been visible and no sound had come to 
indicate that the leopard was in the depression; but that he was 
there I was still convinced, and having failed to get a shot in 
one way I decided to try another way 

Without coming out into the open, there were two natural lines 
of retreat for the leopard, one down the hill towards the pilgrim 
road, and the other up the hill. To move him down the hill 
would not profit me, but if I moved him up the hill he would for 
a certainty go up the cleft in the rock cliff to gain the shelter of 
the bushes above the cliff, and while he was doing so, there 
was a reasonable chance of my getting a shot. 

Entering the depression a little below where I thought the 
leopard was, I started to zigzag very slowly across it, gaining a 
few feet in height at each turn. There was as yet no need for 
me to keep an eye on the cleft, for the babblers were on the 
ground a few feet below it, and they would let me know when 
the leopard was on the move. I had gained about forty yards in 
height in my movements forward and backwards across the 
depression and was about ten yards from, and a little to the left 
of the cleft, when the babblers rose in alarm and, flying into a 
small oak tree and hopping about excitedly on the branches, 
started to give their clear and ringing alarm call, which can in 
the hills be heard for a distance of half a mile. Holding the rifle 
ready to take a snap shot, I stood perfectly still for a minute, 
and then started slowly moving forward. 

The ground here was wet and slippery and, with my eyes fixed 
on the cleft, I had only taken two steps when my rubber-soled 
shoes slipped on the wet surface; and while I was endeavouring 
to regain my balance, the leopard sprang up the cleft, and in 
the bushes above put up a covey of kalege pheasants, which 
came sailing down over my head. 



My second attempt had failed, and though it would have been 
quite easy for me to have moved the leopard back to where he 
had started from, it would have been of no use for me to do so, 
for, from above, the cleft in the rock was not visible until one 
was right up to it, and long before I gained the position the 
leopard would have been far down the depression. 

Ibbotson and I had arranged to meet in the open ravine at 2 
p.m., and a little before that hour he returned from 
Rudraprayag, accompanied by several men carrying the things 
he had gone to fetch. These consisted of food, and drink— in 
the way of tea— our old friend the petromax lamp— which on 
this occasion I decided I would carry myself, if the necessity 
arose— two spare rifles and ammunition, my fishing-reel, a 
liberal supply of cyanide, and the gin-trap. 

Sitting in the ravine by a clear stream of water, we had our 
lunch and brewed ourselves cups of tea, and then went over to 
the kill. 

I will give a description of the position of the kill, to enable you 
to follow our movements and the subsequent happenings. 

The kill was lying about five feet from the near or ravine end of 
the flat strip of ground, which was four feet wide and about 
twenty feet long. The upper side of this strip of ground was 
protected by a high bank, and the lower side by a steep drop 
and a spreading rose-bush. The stunted medlar tree on the 
bank was too small to allow a machan being made in it, so we 
decided to depend entirely on a gun-trap, poison, and the gin- 
trap; having come to this decision we set about our 
preparations. 

First we poisoned the kill, of which the leopard had— for want 
of time— only eaten a small portion; hoping that on this 
occasion he would only consume sufficient to poison himself 
effectively. Then, while I bent over the kill in the position we 
anticipated the leopard would assume when eating, Ibbotson 
sighted and securely lashed his -256 Mannlicher— which had a 



hair trigger— and my -450 high-velocity rifle to two saplings, 
fifteen yards on our approach side of the kill. 

There were no insuperable obstacles to the leopard getting at 
the kill from any side he might wish to, but his most natural 
line of approach from where I had left him was along the 
fifteen feet or so of flat ground, and on this strip of flat ground 
we proceeded to bury the huge gin-trap, first removing from 
the ground every dead leaf, bit of stick, and blade of grass that 
were lying on it. 

After we had dug a hole sufficiently long, wide, and deep- 
removing the displaced earth to a distance— we put the gin- 
trap in it, and when the powerful springs that closed the jaws 
had been depressed, and the plate that constituted the trigger 
adjusted as delicately as we dared set it, we covered the whole 
trap with a layer of green leaves, over which we sprinkled 
earth, and blades of grass in the position we had found them. 

So carefully had the trap been set in the ground that we who 
had set it found it difficult to determine its exact position. 

My fishing-reel was now produced and one end of the dressed 
silk line was tied to the trigger of one rifle, looped round the 
butt-end, and taken to within ten feet of the kill, from where it 
was taken back, looped round the butt-end of the second rifle, 
and tied to the trigger. The line was then cut— much to my 
regret, for it was a new and very good line— and after the end 
had been tied round the woman's waist, the line was passed 
through the loop, the lines to the triggers pulled taut, and a 
secure knot was tied. The line was then cut for the second 
time. 

As we cast a final look over our handiwork— which appeared 
very good to us— it struck us that if the leopard was to wander 
round and approach the kill from our side, and not from the 
side we expected him to come, he might avoid both the guns 
and the gin-trap, and to prevent his doing so we sent to the 
village for a crowbar, while we cut five thornbushes from some 
little distance away. With the crowbar we made five holes a foot 



deep, on our side of the flat strip of ground, and into these 
holes we planted the bushes, stamping the earth round them 
and making them almost as secure and quite as natural to look 
at as when they were growing on the hillside. We were now 
quite satisfied that no animal bigger than a rat could approach 
the kill and eat any portion of it without meeting death in one 
form of another, so throwing off the safety-catches of the rifles, 
we returned to the village. 

Fifty yards from the village, and close to where we had on our 
arrival found the pool of blood, there was a big wide-spreading 
mango tree. In this tree we made a machan from planks 
procured from the village, and on it we piled a lot of sweet¬ 
smelling rice straw, for it was our intention to spend the night 
on it, in anticipation of having to finish off the leopard if he was 
caught in the gin-trap. 

Near sundown we took our position on the machan, which was 
long enough for us to lie on at length and wide enough for us to 
lie side by side. The distance from the machan to the kill across 
the ravine was two hundred yards, and the kill was on a higher 
level than the machan by about a hundred feet. 

Ibbotson feared that his aim with the telescopic sight fitted to 
his rifle would not be quite accurate, so while he took a pair of 
powerful field-glasses from their case, I loaded my -275 rifle. 
Our plan was that while Ibbotson concentrated on the portion 
of the hill along which we expected the leopard to come, I 
would keep a general look-out all over the hill, and if we saw 
the leopard, I would risk taking a shot, even if the shot had to 
be taken at the extreme range to which my rifle was sighted, 
which was three hundred yards. 

While Ibbotson dozed, I smoked and watched the shadows cast 
by the hills in the west slowly creep up the hill in front of us, 
and when the rays from the setting sun were gilding the crest 
of the hill red, Ibbotson awoke and picked up his field-glasses, 
and I picked up my rife, for the time had now come when we 
could expect the leopard to make his appearance. There was 



still some forty live-minutes of daylight left, and during the 
time we intently scanned— I with a pair of eyes that few are 
blessed with, and Ibbotson with his field-glasses— every foot of 
the considerable expanse of hill visible from 
our machan, without seeing the movement of a bird or animal. 

When there was no longer sufficient light to shoot by, I put 
down my rifle, and a little later Ibbotson returned his field- 
glasses to their case. One chance of killing the leopard had 
gone, but there were still three chances left, so we were not 
unduly depressed. 

Shortly after dark it came on to rain, and I whispered to 
Ibbotson that I feared it would prove our undoing, for if the 
additional weight of rain-water on the delicately set gin-trap 
did not set it off, the contracting of the fishing-line due to 
getting wet, no matter how slight it might be, would to a 
certainty fire off his hair-trigger rifle. Some time later, and 
while it was still raining, Ibbotson asked me what time it was. I 
had a luminous wrist-watch, and I had just told him it was a 
quarter to eight when a succession of savage and angry roars 
came from the direction of the kill— the leopard, the much- 
famed man-eating leopard of Rudraprayag, was at long last in 
the gin-trap. 

Ibbotson took a flying leap from the machan while I swung 
down from a branch, and that neither of us broke limbs in the 
descent can only be attributed to luck. The petromax lamp 
hidden in a nearby yam field was found, and while Ibbotson 
proceeded to light it, I gave expression to my fears and doubts, 
and admit I deserved Ibbotson's rejoinder, 'You are a rotten 
pessimist. First you think a few drops of rain are going to 
spring the trap and fire off my rifle, and now you think because 
the leopard is not making a noise that it has got out of the 
trap. 1 That was just what I was thinking, and fearing, for on 
that other occasion when we had trapped a leopard it had 
roared and growled continuously, whereas this one, after that 
one expression of rage which had brought us rumbling out of 



the machan, had been ominously silent. 

Ibbotson is an expert with all makes of lamps and in a very 
short time he had the petromax lit and pumped up, and 
throwing our doubts to the winds— for even Ibbotson was by 
now beginning to suspect the silence— we set off over the 
rough ground as hard as we could go, circling wide to avoid the 
fishing-lines and a possible angry leopard, and approached the 
kill from above. When we got to the high bank and looked down 
we saw the hole in the ground, but no gin-trap. Just as our 
hopes were bounding up, the brilliant light of the petromax 
revealed the trap; with its jaws closed and empty, ten yards 
down the hillside. The kill was no longer lying with its head 
against the bank, and a glance revealed that a considerable 
portion of it had been eaten. 

Our thoughts were too bitter to give expression to as we went 
back to the mango tree and climbed into the machan. There 
was no longer any need for us to keep awake, so heaping some 
of the straw over ourselves, for we had no bedding and the 
night was cold, we went to sleep. 

At the first streak of dawn a fire was built near the mango tree 
and water heated, and after we had drunk several cups of tea 
and warmed ourselves at the fire, we set off for the kill, 
accompanied by the patwari and several of Ibbotson's and my 
men, together with a number of men from the village. 

I mention the fact that there were two of us, and that we had 
the patwari and a number of men with us, for had I been alone 
I would have hesitated to relate what I am now going to tell 
you. 

Fiend or animal, had the slayer of the old woman been present 
and watched our overnight preparations it would even then 
have been difficult to understand how it had, on a dark and 
rainy night, avoided capture or death in one form or another. 
The rain, though light, had been sufficient to soften the ground, 
and we were able to reconstruct and to follow his every 



movement of the previous night. 

The leopard had come from the direction from which we had 
expected him to come, and on arrival at the flat strip of ground, 
had skirted round and below it, and had then approached the 
kill from the side where we had firmly planted the thornbushes. 
Three of these bushes he had pulled up, making a sufficiently 
wide gap to go through, and then, getting hold of the kill, he 
had drawn it a foot or so towards the rifles, thus slackening off 
the fishing-lines. Having done this he had started to eat, 
avoiding while doing so contact with the fishing-line that was 
tied round the woman's body. We had not thought it necessary 
to poison either the head or the neck. These he had eaten first, 
and then— very carefully— he had eaten all that portion of the 
body between the many doses of poison we had inserted in 
different places. 

After satisfying his hunger the leopard left the kill with the 
intention of seeking shelter from the rain and, while he was 
doing so, what I feared would happen actually happened. The 
weight of rainwater on the very finely set trap had depressed 
the plate that constituted the trigger, and released the springs 
just as the leopard was stepping over the trap, and the great 
jaws had met on either side of the stifle, or knee-joint, of his 
hind leg. And here was the greatest tragedy of all, for when 
bringing the trap up from Rudraprayag the men carrying it had 
let it fall, and one of the three-inch-long teeth had been broken 
off, and the stifle of the leopard's left hind leg had been caught 
by the jaws exactly where this missing tooth formed a gap in 
the otherwise perfectly fitting set of teeth. But for this missing 
tooth the leopard would have been fixed to the trap without any 
possibility of getting free, for the grip on his leg had been 
sufficiently good for him to lift the eighty-pound trap out of the 
hole in which we had buried it, and carry it ten yards down the 
hillside. And now; instead of the leopard, the jaws of the trap 
only held a tuft of hair and a small piece of skin, which we later 
— much later— had the great satisfaction of fitting back into 
position. 



However unbelievable the actions of the leopard may appear to 
have been, they were in fact just what one would have 
expected from an animal that had been a man-eater for eight 
years. Avoiding the open ground, and approaching the kill 
under cover; removing the thorn obstruction we bad erected 
across the blood trail he had left that morning; pulling the kill 
towards him into a convenient position for his meal, and 
rejecting those portions of the kill that we had poisoned— 
cyanide, of which he now had experience, has a very strong 
smell— were all quite normal and natural actions. 

The explanation I have given for the springing of the trap is, I 
am convinced, correct. It was just a coincidence that the 
leopard happened to be directly over the trap the very moment 
that the additional weight of water set it off. 

Having dismantled the gin-trap, and waited until the relatives 
had removed what remained of the old woman for cremation, 
we set out to walk back to Rudraprayag, leaving our men to 
follow us. Some time during the night the leopard had come to 
the mango tree, for we found his pug-marks near the tree 
where the pool of blood— now washed away by the rain— had 
been, and we followed these pug-marks down the track to the 
pilgrim road and four miles along the road to the gate of the 
Inspection Bungalow where, after scratching up the ground at 
the base of one of the pillars of the gate, he had gone on down 
the road for another mile to where my old friend the packman 
was camped, one of whose goats he had wantonly killed. 

I need not tell those of you who have carried a sporting rifle in 
any part of the world that all these many repeated failures and 
disappointments, so far from discouraging me, only 
strengthened my determination to carry on until that great day 
or night came when, having discarded poisons and traps, I 
would get an opportunity of using my rifle as rifles were 
intended to be used, to put a bullet truly and accurately into 
the man-eater's body. 



A Lesson in Caution 

I HAVE NEVER AGREED WITH those sportsmen who attribute 
all their failures in big-game hunting to their being Jonahs. 

The thoughts of a sportsman, whether they be pessimistic or 
whether they be optimistic, sitting waiting for an animal, 
cannot in any conceivable way influence the actions of the 
animal he is endeavouring to shoot or, maybe, to photograph. 

We are apt to forget that the hearing and sight of wild animals, 
and especially of those animals that depend exclusively on 
these senses not only for food but also for self-preservation, are 
on a plane far and away above that of civilized human beings, 
and that there is no justification for us to assume that because 
we cannot hear or see the movements of our prospective 
quarry, our quarry cannot hear or see our movements. A wrong 
estimation of the intelligence of animals, and the inability to sit 
without making any sound or movement for the required length 
of time, is the cause of all failures when sitting up for animals. 
As an example of the acute sense of hearing of carnivores, and 
the care it is necessary to exercise when contact with one of 
them is desired, I will relate one of my recent experiences. 

On a day in March, when the carpet of dry leaves on the 
ground recorded the falling of every dead leaf and the 
movements of the smallest of the birds that feed on the ground, 
I located in some very heavy undergrowth the exact position of 
a tiger I had long wished to photograph, by moving a troop 
of langurs in the direction in which I suspected the tiger to be 
lying up. Seventy yards from the tiger there was an open glade, 
fifty yards long and thirty yards wide. On the edge of the glade, 
away from the tiger, there was a big tree overgrown with 
creepers that extended right up to the topmost branches; 
twenty feet from the ground the tree forked in two. I knew that 
the tiger would cross the glade in the late afternoon, for the 
glade lay directly between him and his sambhar kill which I had 
found early that morning. There was no suitable cover near the 
kill for the tiger to lie up in during the day, so he had gone to 



the heavy undergrowth where the langurs had located him for 
me. 

It is often necessary when shooting or photographing tigers 
and leopards on foot, to know the exact position of one's 
quarry whether it be a wounded animal that one desires to put 
out of its misery or an animal that one wants to photograph, 
and the best way of doing this is by enlisting the help of birds 
or animals. With patience, and with a knowledge of the habit of 
the bird or animal the sportsman desires to use, it is not 
difficult to get a particular bird or animal to go in the required 
direction. The birds most suitable for this purpose are red 
jungle-fowl, peafowl, and white-capped babblers, and of 
animals the most suitable are kakars andlangurs. 

The tiger I am telling you about was unwounded and it would 
have been quite easy for me to go into the undergrowth and 
find him myself, but in doing so I should have disturbed him 
and defeated my own purposes, whereas by using the troop 
of langurs and knowing what their reactions would be on 
sighting the tiger— if he happened to be in the undergrowth— I 
was able to get the information I wanted without disturbing the 
tiger. 

Very carefully I stalked the tree I have referred to, and avoiding 
contact with the creepers, the upper tendrils and leaves of 
which might have been visible from where the tiger was lying, I 
climbed to the fork, where I had a comfortable seat and perfect 
concealment. Getting out my 16-mm cine-camera I made an 
opening to the screen of leaves in front of me just big enough 
to photograph through, and having accomplished all this 
without having made a sound, I sat still. My field of vision was 
confined to the glade and to the jungle immediately beyond it. 

After I had been sitting for an hour, a pair of bronzewing doves 
rose out of the jungle and went skimming over the low 
brushwood, and a minute or two later, and a little closer to me, 
a small flight of upland pipits rose off the ground and, after 
daintily tripping along the branches of a leafless tree, rose 



above the tree-tops and went off. Neither of these two species 
of birds has any alarm call, but I knew from their behaviour 
that the tiger was afoot and that they had been disturbed by 
him. Minutes later I was slowly turning my eyes from left to 
right scanning every foot of ground visible to me, when my 
eyes came to rest on a small white object, possibly an inch or 
two square, immediately in front of me, and about ten feet from 
the edge of the glade. Focusing my eyes on this stationary 
object for a little while, I then continued to scan the bushes to 
the limit of my field of vision to the right, and then back again 
to the white object. 

I was now convinced that this object had not been where it was 
for more than a minute or two before I had first caught sight of 
it, and that it could not be anything other than a white mark on 
the tiger's face. Quite evidently the tiger had heard me when I 
was approaching or climbing the tree, though I had done this in 
thin rubber shoes without making as far as I was aware any 
sound, and when the time had come for him to go to his kill he 
had stalked, for a distance of seventy yards over dry leaves, the 
spot he had pin-pointed as the source of some suspicious 
sound. After lying for half an hour without making any 
movement, he stood up, stretched himself, yawned, and, 
satisfied that he had nothing to fear, walked out into the glade. 
Here he stood, turning his head first to the right and then to 
the left, and then crossed the glade, passing right under my 
tree on his way to his kill. 

When in my wanderings through the jungles I see 
the machans that have been put up for the purpose of shooting 
carnivores, and note the saplings that have been felled near by 
to make the platform, the branches that have been cut to give a 
clear view; and see the litter and debris left lying about, and 
consider the talking and noise that must have accompanied 
these operations, I am not surprised when I hear people say 
they have sat up hundreds of times for tigers and leopards 
without ever having seen one of these animals, and attribute 
their failures to their being Jonahs. 



Our failure to bag the man-eater up to that date was not due to 
our having done anything we should not have done, or left 
undone anything we should have done. It could only be 
attributed to sheer bad luck. Bad luck that had prevented my 
receiving the electric light in time; that had given Ibbotson 
cramps in both legs; that had made the leopard eat an overdose 
of cyanide; and, finally, that had made the men drop the gin- 
trap and break the one tooth that mattered. So when Ibbotson 
returned to Pauri, after our failure to kill the leopard over the 
body of his seventy-year-old victim, I was full of hope, for I 
considered my chance of shooting the leopard as good as they 
were on the first day I arrived at Rudraprayag, and in fact 
better than they had then been, for I now knew the capabilities 
of the animal I had to deal with. 

One thing was causing me a lot of uneasiness and much heart¬ 
searching, and that was confining the man-eater to one bank of 
the river. However I looked at it, it did not appear to be right 
that the people on the left bank of the Alaknanda should be 
exposed to attacks by the leopard, while the people on the right 
bank were free from the risk of such attacks. Including the boy 
killed two days before our arrival, three people had recently 
lost their lives on the left bank, and others might meet with a 
like fate, and yet to open the two bridges and let the leopard 
cross over to the right bank would add an hundredfold to my 
difficulties, which were already considerable, and would not 
benefit Garhwal as a whole, for the lives of the people on the 
right bank of the river were just as valuable as the lives of the 
people on the left bank; so, very reluctantly, I decided to keep 
the bridges closed. And here I should like to pay my tribute to 
the people— numbering many thousands— living on the left 
bank of the river who, knowing that the closing of the bridges 
was confining the activities of the dread man-eater to their 
area, never once, during the months I closed the bridges, 
removed the barriers themselves, or asked me to do so. 

Having decided to keep the bridges closed, I sent a man to 
warn the villagers of their danger, and myself carried the 



warning to as many villages as time and my ability to walk 
permitted of my doing. No one whom I talked with on the roads 
and in the villages ever expressed one word of resentment at 
the leopard having been confined to their area, and everywhere 
I went I was offered hospitality and speeded on my way with 
blessings, and I was greatly encouraged by the assurances 
from both men and women— who did not know but what they 
might be the man-eater's next victim— that it was no matter for 
regret that the leopard had not died yesterday, for surely it 
would die today or, maybe, tomorrow. 



A Wild Boar Hunt 

THE OLD PACKMAN HAD ARRIVED at the thorn enclosure late 
the previous evening. He was packing salt and gur from the 
bazaar at Hardwar to the villages beyond Badrinath, and as his 
flock of sheep and goats was heavily laden and the last march 
had been a long one, he had arrived too late at the thorn 
enclosure to repair the weak places in it, with the result that 
several of the goats had strayed out of the enclosure and one of 
them the leopard had killed, close to the road, during the early 
hours of the morning. The barking of his dogs had awakened 
him, and when it got light, he saw his best goat— a beautiful 
steel-grey animal nearly as large as a Shetland pony— lying 
dead near the road, wantonly killed by the man-eater. 

The behaviour of the man-eater during the previous night 
showed the extent to which the habits of a leopard change 
when it has become a man-eater and has lived in close 
association with human beings over a long period of years. 

It was reasonable to assume that the man-eater had received a 
great shock, and a great fright, by being caught in the gin-trap; 
his having carried the heavy trap for ten yards and the angry 
way in which he had roared were in fact proof of this; and one 
would have expected him, the moment he got out of the trap, to 
have retired to some secluded spot as far removed from human 
habitation as possible, and to have remained there until he was 
again hungry, which he would not be for several days. But, so 
far from doing this, he had quite evidently remained in the 
vicinity of the kill, and after watching us climb into 
the machan and giving us time to go to sleep, had come to 
investigate; fortunately for us, Ibbotson had taken the 
precaution to protect the machan by putting wire-netting all 
round it, for it is not an unheard-of thing for man-eating 
leopards to kill people who are sitting up trying to shoot them. 
At the present time there is a man-eating leopard in the Central 
Provinces that has— at different times— killed and eaten four 
Indian sportsmen who were trying to shoot him; up to the time 



I last heard of this animal he had killed forty human beings, 
and owing to his habit of eating his would-be slayers, he was 
living a very peaceful and undisturbed life, varying his human 
diet with game and domestic animals. 

After his visit to the mango tree, our man-eater went along the 
village path to its junction with the track. Here, where we had 
found the pool of blood, he had turned to the right and gone 
down the track for a mile, and then along the pilgrim road for 
another four miles and into the most densely populated part of 
the area in which he was operating. On arrival at Rudraprayag, 
he had gone through the main street of the bazaar, and half a 
mile farther on had scratched up the ground at the gate of the 
Inspection Bungalow. The rain of the previous night had 
softened the clay surface of the road, and on the soft clay the 
pug-marks of the leopard showed up clearly; and from them it 
was possible to see that the leopard's encounter with the gin- 
trap had not resulted in injury to any of his limbs. 

After breakfast I took up the tracks at the gate and followed 
them to the packman's camp. From a bend in the road, a 
hundred yards from the camp, the leopard had caught sight of 
the goats that had strayed from the enclosure, and crossing 
from the outer to the inner edge of the road and creeping along 
under shelter of the hill he had stalked the grazing animals 
and, after killing the steel-grey goat but without even troubling 
to drink its blood, had returned to the road. 

In the thorn enclosure, guarding the dead goat and the neatly 
stacked pile of packs, were the packman's two sheep-dogs, 
tethered to stout pegs with short lengths of heavy chain. These 
big, black, and powerful dogs that are used by packmen 
throughout our hills are not accredited sheep-dogs in the same 
sense that sheep-dogs in Great Britain and in Europe are. On 
the march the dogs keep close to heel, and their duties— which 
they perform very efficiently— start when camp is made. At 
night they guard the camp against wild animals— I have known 
two of them to kill a leopard— and during the day and while the 



packmen are away grazing the flock they guard the camp 
against all intruders. A case is on record of one of these dogs 
having killed a man who was attempting to remove a pack from 
the camp it had been left to guard. 

I picked up the tracks of the leopard where he returned to the 
road after killing the goat, and followed them through Golabrai 
and for a mile farther on, to where a deep ravine crosses the 
road, up which he had gone. The distance the leopard had 
covered from the mango tree to the ravine was about eight 
miles. This long and seemingly aimless walk away from a kill 
was in itself a thing no ordinary leopard would under any 
circumstances have undertaken, nor would an ordinary leopard 
have killed a goat when he was not hungry. 

A quarter of a mile beyond the ravine the old packman was 
sitting on a rock by the side of the road, spinning wool and 
watching his flock, which were grazing on the open hillside. 
When he had dropped his spinning-stick and wool into the 
capacious pocket in his blanket robe and accepted a cigarette, 
he asked if I had come past his camp. When I told him I had 
done so and that I had seen what the evil spirit had done, and 
added that it would be wise to sell his dogs to camelmen on his 
next visit to Hardwar, for it was quite evident that they were 
lacking in courage, he nodded his head as one in agree-with 
what he heard. Then he said, 'Sahib, even we old hands are apt 
at times to make mistakes, and suffer for them, even as I have 
this night suffered by losing my best goat. My dogs have the 
courage of tigers, and are the best dogs in all Garhwal, and it is 
an insult to them for you to say they are only fit to be sold to 
camelmen. My camp as you doubtless observed, is very close to 
the road, and I feared that if by chance anyone came along the 
road by night, my dogs might do him an injury so I chained 
them up outside the thorn enclosure instead of leaving them 
loose, as is my wont. You have seen the result; but do not blame 
the dogs, sahib, for in their efforts to save my goat their collars 
have bitten deep into their necks, and made wounds that will 
take many days to heal . 1 



While we were talking, an animal appeared on the crest of the 
hill on the far side of the Ganges. From its colour and size, I at 
first thought it was a Himalayan bear, but when it started to 
come down the hill towards the river, I saw it was a big wild 
boar. The pig was followed by a pack of village pye dogs, who 
in turn were followed by a rabble of boys and men, all armed 
with sticks of varying size. Last of all came a man carrying a 
gun. As this man crested the hill he raised his piece and we 
saw a puff of smoke, and a little later heard the dull report of a 
muzzle-loading gun. The only living things within range of the 
gun were the boys and men, but as none of them dropped out 
of the race, the sportsman appeared to have missed them. 

The pig had a long grassy slope before him, with an odd bush 
dotted here and there, and below the grass slope was some 
broken ground, and below that again a dense belt of 
brushwood which extended right down to the river. 

On the rough broken ground the pig lost his lead, and pig and 
pye dogs disappeared into the brushwood together. Next 
minute all the dogs, with the exception of the big light-coloured 
animal that had been leading the pack, dashed back out of the 
brushwood. When the boys and men arrived they appeared to 
urge the dogs to re-enter the cover, but this— after apparently 
having recently seen what the pig could do with his tusks— 
they were unwilling to do. The man with the gun then arrived, 
and was immediately surrounded by the boys and men. 

To us sitting on our elevated grandstand with the river flowing 
between, the scene being enacted on the farther hill was a 
silent picture, for the noise of the water deadened sound and 
all we had heard was the dull report of the muzzle-loader. 

The sportsman was apparently as reluctant to enter the cover 
as the dogs were, for presently he broke away from his 
companions and sat down on a rock, as if to say, 'I have done 
my bit, now you do yours'. Confronted with this double 
dilemma— for the dogs, even after some of them had been 
beaten, stoutly refused to face the pig— first the boys and then 



the men started to throw stones into the brushwood. 


While this was going on, we saw the pig emerge from the lower 
end of the brushwood on to a narrow strip of sand. With a few 
quick steps he came out into the open, stood perfectly still for a 
few seconds, took a few more steps, stopped again, and then 
with a little run plunged into the river. Pigs— the wild variety- 
are exceptionally good swimmers, and they do not cut their 
throats with their hooves while swimming, as is generally 
believed. 

The current in the river was strong, but there is no bigger- 
hearted animal than our wild pig, and when I last saw the old 
boar he had been washed down the river a quarter of a mile, 
but was swimming strongly and was nearing our bank, which I 
have no doubt he reached safely. 

'Was the pig within range of your rifle, sahib ? 1 asked the 
packman. 

'Yes/ I replied, 'the pig was within range, but I have not 
brought a rifle to Garhwal to shoot pigs that are running for 
their lives, but to shoot what you think is an evil spirit, and 
what I know is a leopard/ 

'Have it your own way,' he rejoined; 'and now, as you are going, 
and we may never meet again, take my blessings with you, and 
time will prove whether you or I am right.' 

I regret I never saw the packman again, for he was a grand old 
man, as proud as Lucifer, and as happy as the day was long, 
when leopards were not killing his best goats and when the 
courage of his dogs was not being questioned. 



Vigil on a Pine Tree 

IBBOTSON RETURNED TO PAURI NEXT DAY, and the 
following morning, when I was visiting the villages on the hill 
to the east of Rudraprayag, I found the tracks of the man-eater 
on a path leading out of a village in which the previous night he 
had tried to break open the door of a house in which there was 
a child suffering from a bad cough. On following the tracks for 
a couple of miles they led me to the shoulder of the mountain 
where, some days previously, Ibbotson and I had sat up over 
the calling goat which the leopard had later killed. 

It was still quite early, and as there was a chance of finding the 
leopard basking on one of the rocks in this considerable area of 
broken ground, I lay on a projecting rock that commanded an 
extensive view. It had rained the previous evening— thus 
enabling me to track the leopard— and washed the haze out of 
the atmosphere. Visibility was at its best and the view from the 
projecting rock was as good as could be seen in any part of the 
world where mountains rise to a height of twenty-three 
thousand feet. Immediately below me was the beautiful valley 
of the Alaknanda, with the river showing as a gleaming silver 
ribbon winding in and out of it. On the hill beyond the river, 
villages were dotted about, some with only a single thatched 
hut, and others with long rows of slate-roofed houses. These 
row buildings are in fact individual homesteads, built one 
against the other to save expense and to economize space, for 
the people are poor and every foot of workable land in Garhwal 
is needed for agriculture. 

Beyond the hills were rugged rocks cliffs, down which 
avalanches roar in winter and early spring, and beyond and 
above the cliffs were the eternal snows, showing up against the 
intense blue sky as clear as if cut out of white cardboard. No 
more beautiful or peaceful scene could be imagined, and yet 
when the sun, now shining on the back of my head, set on the 
far side of the snow mountains, terror— terror which it is not 
possible to imagine until experienced— would grip, as it had 



done for eight long years, the area I was now overlooking. 

I had been lying on the rock for an hour when two men came 
down the hill, on their way to the bazaar. They were from a 
village about a mile farther up the hill that I had visited the 
previous day, and they informed me that a little before sunrise 
they had heard a leopard calling in this direction. We discussed 
the possibilities of my getting a shot at the leopard over a goat, 
and as at that time I had no goats of my own, they offered to 
bring me one from their village and promised to meet me 
where we were standing, two hours before sunset. 

When the men had gone I looked round for a place where I 
could sit. The only tree on the whole of this pail of the 
mountain was a solitary pine. It was growing on the ridge close 
to the path down which the men had come, and from under it a 
second path took off and ran across the face of the mountain 
skirting the upper edge of the broken ground, where I had 
recently been looking for the leopard. The tree commanded an 
extensive view, but it could be difficult to climb, and would 
afford little cover. However, as it was the only tree in the area, I 
had no choice, so decided I would try it. 

The men were waiting for me with a goat when I returned at 
about 4 p.m., and when, in reply to their question where I 
intended sitting, I pointed to the pine, they started laughing. 
Without a rope ladder, they said, it would not be possible to 
climb the tree; and further, if I succeeded in climbing the tree 
without a ladder, and carried out my intention of remaining out 
all night, I should have no protection against the man-eater, to 
whom the tree would offer no obstacle. There were two white 
men in Garhwal— Ibbotson was one of them— who had 
collected birds' eggs when boys, and both of whom could climb 
the tree; and as there is no exact equivalent in Hindustani for 
'waiting until you come to a bridge before crossing it 7 , I let the 
second part of the men's objection go unanswered, contenting 
myself by pointing to my rifle. 

The pine was not easy to climb, for there were no branches for 



twenty feet, but once having reached the lowest branch, the 
rest was easy. I had provided myself with a long length of 
cotton cord, and when the men had tied my rifle to one end of 
it, I drew it up and climbed to the top of the tree, where the 
pine-needles afforded most cover. 

The men had assured me that the goat was a good caller, and 
after they tied it to an exposed root of the tree they set off for 
their village promising to return early next morning. The goat 
watched the men out of sight, and then started to nibble the 
short grass at the foot of the tree. The fact that it had not up to 
then called once did not worry me, for I felt sure that it would 
presently feel lonely and that it would then do its share of the 
business of the evening, and if it did it while it was still night, 
from my elevated position I should be able to kill the leopard 
long before it got anywhere near the goat. 

When I climbed the tree the shadows cast by the snow 
mountains had reached the Alaknanda. Slowly these shadows 
crept up the hill and passed me, until only the top of the 
mountain glowed with red light. As this glow faded, long 
streamers of light shot up from the snow mountains where the 
rays of the setting sun were caught and held on a bank of 
clouds as soft and as light as thistledown. Everyone who has 
eyes to see a sunset— and the number, as you might have 
observed, is regrettably few— thinks that the sunsets in his 
particular part of the world are the best ever. I am no 
exception, for I too think that there are no sunsets in all the 
world to compare with ours, and a good second are the sunsets 
in northern Tanganyika, where some quality in the atmosphere 
makes snow-capped Kilimanjaro, and the clouds that are 
invariably above it, glow like molten gold in the rays of the 
setting sun. Our sunsets in the Himalayas are mostly red, pink, 
or gold. The one I was looking at the evening from my seat on 
the pine tree was rose pink, and the white shafts of light, 
starting as spear-points from valleys in the cardboard snows, 
shot through the pink clouds and, broadening, faded out in the 
sky overhead. 



The goat, like many human beings, had no interest in sunsets, 
and after nibbling the grass within reach, scratched a shallow 
hole for itself, lay down, curled up, and went to sleep. Here was 
a dilemma. I had counted on the animal now placidly sleeping 
below me to call up the leopard, and not once since I had first 
seen it had it opened its mouth, except to nibble grass, and 
now, having made itself comfortable, it would probably sleep 
throughout the night. To have left the tree at that hour in an 
attempt to return to the bungalow would have added one more 
to the number who deliberately commit suicide, and as I had to 
be doing something to kill the man-eater, and as— in the 
absence of a kill— one place was as good as another, I decided 
to stay where I was, and try to call up the leopard myself. 

If I were asked what had contributed most to my pleasure 
during all the years that I have spent in Indian jungles, I would 
unhesitatingly say that I had derived most pleasure from a 
knowledge of the language, and the habits, of the jungle-folk. 
There is no universal language in the jungles; each species has 
its own language, and though the vocabulary of some is limited, 
as in the case of porcupines and vultures, the language of each 
species is understood by all the jungle-folk. The vocal chords of 
human beings are more adaptable than the vocal chords of any 
of the jungle-Folk, with the one exception of the crested wire¬ 
tailed drongo, and for this reason it is possible for human 
beings to hold commune with quite a big range of birds and 
animals. The ability to speak the language of the jungle-folk, 
apart from adding hundredfold to one's pleasure in the jungle, 
can, if so desired, be put to great use. One example will suffice. 

Lionel Fortescue— up till recently a housemaster at Eton— and 
I were on a photographing and fishing tour in the Himalayas 
shortly after 1918, and we arrived one evening at a Forest 
Bungalow at the foot of a great mountain, on the far side of 
which was our objective, the Vale of Kashmir. We had been 
marching over hard ground for many days, and as the men 
carrying our luggage needed a rest, we decided to halt for a 
day at the bungalow. Next day, while Fortescue wrote up his 



notes, I set out to explore the mountain and try for a Kashmir 
stag. I had been informed by friends who had shot in Kashmir 
that it was not possible to shoot one of these stags without the 
help of an experienced shikari, and this was confirmed by 
the chowkidar in charge of the Forest Bungalow. With the 
whole day before me I set out alone, after breakfast, without 
having the least idea at what elevation the red deer lived, or 
the kind of ground on which they were likely to be found. The 
mountain, over which there is a pass into Kashmir, is about 
twelve thousand feet high, and after I had climbed to a height 
of eight thousand a storm came on. 

From the colour of the clouds I knew I was in for a hailstorm, 
so I selected with care a tree under which to shelter. I have 
seen both human beings and animals killed by hail, and by the 
lightning that invariably accompanies hailstorms, so rejecting 
the big fir trees with tapering tops I selected a small tree with 
a rounded top and dense foliage, and collecting a supply of 
dead wood and fir-cones, I built a fire, and for the hour that the 
thunder roared overhead and the hail lashed down, I sat at the 
foot of my tree safe and warm. 

The moment the hail stopped the sun came out, and from the 
shelter of the tree I stepped into fairyland, for the hail that 
carpeted the ground gave off a million points of light to which 
every glistening leaf and blade of grass added its quota. 
Continuing up for another two or three thousand feet, I came 
on an outcrop of rock, at the foot of which was a bed of blue 
mountain poppies. The stalks of many of these, the most 
beautiful of all wild flowers in the Himalayas, were broken, 
even so these sky-blue flowers standing in a bed of spotless 
white were a never-to-be-forgotten sight. 

The rocks were too slippery to climb, and there appeared to be 
no object in going to the top of the hill, so keeping to the 
contours I went to the left, and after half a mile through a 
forest of giant fir trees I came to a grassy slope which, starting 
from the top of the hill, extended several thousand feet down 



into the forest. As I came through the trees towards this grassy 
slope I saw on the far side of it an animal standing on a little 
knoll, with its tail towards me. From illustrations seen in game 
books I knew the animal was a red Kashmir deer, and when it 
raised its head, I saw it was a hind. 

On my side of the grassy slope, and about thirty yards from the 
edge of the forest, there was a big isolated rock some four feet 
high; the distance between this rock and the knoll was about 
forty yards. Moving only when the deer was cropping the grass, 
and remaining still each time she raised her head, I crept up to 
the shelter of the rock. The hind was quite obviously a sentinel, 
and from the way she looked to her right each time she raised 
her head, I knew she had companions, and the exact direction 
in which these companions were. To approach any nearer over 
the grass without being seen was not possible. To re-enter the 
forest and work down from above would not have been difficult 
but would have defeated my purpose, for the wind was blowing 
down the hill. There remained the alternative of re-entering the 
forest and skirting round the lower end of the grass slope, but 
this would take time and entail a stiff climb. I therefore finally 
decided to remain where I was and see if these deer— which I 
was seeing for the first time— would react in the same way 
as cheetaland sambhar do to the call of a leopard, of which I 
knew there was at least one on the mountain, for I had seen its 
scratch-marks earlier in the day. With only one eye showing, I 
waited until the hind was cropping the grass, and then gave the 
call of a leopard. 

At the first sound of my voice the hind swung round and, facing 
me, started to strike the ground with her forefeet. This was a 
warning to her companions to be on the alert, but those 
companions whom I wanted to see would not move until the 
hind called, and this she would not do until she saw the 
leopard. I was wearing a brown tweed coat, and projecting a 
few inches of my left shoulder beyond the rock I moved it up 
and down. The movement was immediately detected by the 
hind who, taking a few quick steps forward, started to call; the 



danger she had warned her companions of was in sight, and it 
was now safe for them to join her. The first to come was a 
yearling, which, stepping daintily over the hail-covered ground, 
ranged itself along side the hind; the yearling was followed by 
three stags, who in turn were followed by an old hind. The 
entire herd, numbering six in all, were now in full view at a 
range of thirty-five yards. The hind was still calling, while the 
others, with ears alternately held rigid or feeling forward and 
backward for sound and wind direction, were standing 
perfectly still and gazing into the forest behind me. My seat on 
the melting hail was uncomfortable and wet, and to remain 
inactive longer would possibly result in a cold. I had seen a 
representative herd of the much-famed Kashmir deer, and I had 
heard a hind call, but there was one thing more that I wanted. 
That was, to hear a stag call; so I again projected a few inches 
of my shoulder beyond the rock, and had the satisfaction of 
hearing the stags, the hinds, and the yearling calling in 
different pitched keys. 

My pass permitted me to shoot one stag, and for all I knew one 
of the stags might have carried a record head, but though I had 
set out that morning to look for a stag, and procure meat for 
the camp, I now realized that I was in no urgent need of a 
trophy. In any case the stag's meat would probably be tough so, 
instead of using the rifle, I stood up, and six of the most 
surprised deer in Kashmir vanished out of sight, and a moment 
later I heard them crashing through the undergrowth on the 
far side of the knoll. 

It was now time for me to retrace my steps to the bungalow, 
and I decided to go down the grassy slope and work through 
the lighter forest at the foot of the mountain. The slope was at 
an angle that lent itself to an easy lope, provided care was 
taken to see that every step was correctly placed. I was 
running in the middle of the hundred-yard open ground and 
had gone about six hundred yards when I caught sight of a 
white object, standing on a rock at the edge of the forest on the 
left-hand side of the slope, and about three hundred yards 



below me. A hurried glance convinced me that the white object 
was a goat, that had probably been lost in the forest. We had 
been without meat for a fortnight and I had promised Fortescue 
that I would bring something back with me, and there was my 
opportunity. The goat had seen me, and if I could disarm 
suspicion would possibly let me pass close enough to catch it 
by the legs; so as I loped along I edged to the left, keeping the 
animal in sight out of the corner of my eyes. Provided the 
animal stayed where it was, no better place on all the mountain 
could have been found on which to catch it, for the flat rock, at 
the very edge of which it was standing, jutted out into the 
slope, and was about five feet high. Without looking directly at 
it, and keeping up a steady pace, I ran past the rock and, as I 
did so, made a sweep with my left hand for its forelegs. With a 
sneeze of alarm the animal reared up, avoiding my grasp, and 
when I pulled up clear of the rock and turned round, I saw to 
my amazement that the animal I had mistaken for a white goat 
was an albino musk-deer. With only some ten feet between us 
the game little animal was standing its ground and sneezing 
defiance at me. Turning away I walked down the hill for fifty 
yards, and when I looked back, the deer was still standing on 
the rock, possibly congratulating itself on having frightened me 
away. When some weeks later I related the occurrence to the 
Game Warden of Kashmir he expressed great regret at my not 
having shot the deer, and was very anxious to know the exact 
locality in which I had seen it, but as my memory for places, 
and my description of localities, is regrettably faulty; I do not 
think that particular albino musk-deer is gracing any museum. 

Male leopards are very resentful of intrusion of others of their 
kind in the area they consider to be their own. True, the man- 
eater's territory extended over an area of five hundred square 
miles in which there were possibly many other male leopards; 
still, he had been in this particular area for several weeks, and 
might very reasonably consider it his own. And again, the 
mating season was only just over, and the leopard might 
mistake my call for the call of a female in search of a mate, so 



waiting until it was quite dark I called and, to my surprise and 
delight, was immediately answered by a leopard some four 
hundred yards below and a little to the right. 

The ground between us was strewn with great rocks and 
overgrown with matted thornbushes, and I knew the leopard 
would not come in a straight line towards me, and that he 
would probably skirt round the broken ground and come up a 
subsidiary ridge to the one my tree was on; this I found, when 
next he called, that he was doing. Five minutes later I located 
his call as coming from the path that, starting from my tree, 
ran across the face of the hill, about two hundred yards away. 
This call I answered, to give the leopard direction. Three, or it 
may have been four, minutes later, he called again from a 
distance of a hundred yards. 

It was a dark night and I had an electric torch lashed to the 
side of my rifle, and my thumb on the push button. From the 
root of the tree the path ran in a straight line for fifty yards, to 
where there was a sharp bend in it. It would not be possible for 
me to know when or where to direct the beam of the torch on 
this part of the path, so I should have to wait until the leopard 
was on the goat. 

Just beyond the bend, and only sixty yards away, the leopard 
again called, and was answered by another leopard far up the 
mountain-side. A complication as unexpected as it was 
unfortunate, for my leopard was too close now for me to call, 
and as he had last heard me from a distance of two hundred 
yards he would naturally assume that the coy female had 
removed herself farther up the hill and was calling to him to 
join her there. There was, however, just a possibility of his 
continuing along the path to its junction with the path coming 
down the hill, in which case he would be sure to kill the goat, 
even if he had no use for it. But the goat's luck was in, and 
mine out, for the leopard cut across the angle formed by the 
two paths, and the next time he called he was a hundred yards 
farther from me, and a hundred yards nearer his prospective 



coaxing mate. The calling of the two leopards drew nearer and 
nearer together, and finally stopped. After a long period of 
silence the caterwauling of these two giant cats came floating 
down to me from where I judged the grassland ended and the 
dense forest began. 

The leopard's luck was unfortunately in, in more ways than 
one, not least of all because it was dark, for leopards when 
courting are very easy to shoot. The same can be said of tigers, 
but the sportsman who goes on foot to look for courting tigers 
should be quite sure that he wants to see them, for a tigress— 
never a tiger— is very sensitive at these times, and quite 
understandably so, for males of the cat tribe are rough in their 
courting, and do not know how sharp their claws are. 

The leopard had not died, nor would he die that night, but may 
be he would die the next day, or the day after, for his sands 
were running out; and so for a long moment I thought were 
mine, for without any warning a sudden blast of wind struck 
the tree, and my heels and my head changed their relative 
position with the land of Garhwal. For seconds I thought it 
impossible for the tree to regain its upright position, or for me 
to retain contact with it. When the pressure eased, the tree and 
I got back to where we were before the wind struck us, and 
fearing that worse might follow, I hurriedly tied the rifle to a 
branch, to have the use of both hands. The pine had possibly 
withstood many wind-storms equally bad, if not worse, but 
never with a human being on it to add weight and increase 
wind-pressure. When the rifle was safe, I climbed out on to one 
branch after another, and broke off all the tassels of pine- 
needles that I could reach. It may only have been my 
imagination, but after I had lightened the tree it did not appear 
to heel over as dangerously as it had at first done. Fortunately 
the pine was comparatively young and supple, and its roots 
firm set, for it was tossed about like a blade of grass for an 
hour and then, as suddenly as it had started, the wind died 
down. There was no possibility of the leopard returning, so, 
after I had smoked a cigarette, I followed the goat into the land 



of dreams. 


As the sun was rising a cooee brought me back to within fifty 
feet of earth, and under the tree were my two companions of 
the previous evening, reinforced by two youths from their 
village. When they saw that I was awake they asked whether I 
had heard the leopards during the night, and what had 
happened to the tree, and were hugely amused when I told 
them I had had a friendly conversation with the leopards, and 
that having nothing else to do I had amused myself by breaking 
the branches of the tree. I then asked them if by chance they 
had noticed that there had been some little wind during the 
night, on which one of the youths answered, 'A little wind, 
sahib! Such a big wind has never been known, and it has blown 
away my hut! 7 To which his companion rejoined, 'That is no 
matter for regret, sahib, for Sher Singh has long been 
threatening to rebuild his hut, and the wind has saved him the 
trouble of dismantling the old one. 1 



My Night of Terror 

FOR SEVERAL DAYS AFTER MY EXPERIENCE on the pine tree 
I lost touch with the man-eater. He did not return to the broken 
ground and I found no trace of him, or of the female who had 
saved his life, in the miles of forest I searched on the high 
ground above the cultivated land. In these forests I was more 
at home, and if the leopards had been anywhere in them I 
should have been able to find them, for there were birds and 
animals in the forest that would have helped me. 

The female, being restless, was quite evidently straying far 
from her home when she heard me call from the top of the pine 
tree, and on being joined by the male had gone back to her own 
area, accompanied by the mate I had helped her to find. The 
male would presently return alone, and as the precautions now 
being taken by the people on the left bank were making it 
difficult for him to procure a human kill, he would probably try 
to cross over to the right bank of the Alaknanda, so for the next 
few nights I mounted guard on the Rudraprayag bridge. 

There were three approaches to the bridge on the left bank, the 
one from the south passing close to the 

bridge chowkidar's house, and on the fourth night I heard the 
leopard killing the chowkidar's dog; a friendly nondescript little 
beast that used to run out and greet me every time I passed 
that way. The dog seldom barked, but that night it had been 
barking for five minutes when suddenly the bark ended in a 
yelp, followed by the shouting of the chawkidar from inside his 
house, after which there was silence. The thornbushes had 
been removed from the archway and the bridge was open, yet 
though I lay with finger on trigger for the rest of the night the 
leopard did not try to cross. 

After killing the dog and leaving it lying on the road, the 
leopard, as I found from his tracks next morning, came to the 
tower. Five more steps in the direction in which he was going 
would have brought him out on the bridge, but those five steps 
he did not take. Instead he turned to the right, and after going 



a short distance up the footpath towards the bazaar, he 
returned and went up the pilgrim road to the north. A mile up 
the road I lost his tracks. 

Two days later I received a report that a cow had been killed 
the previous evening, seven miles up the pilgrim road. It was 
suspected that the cow had been killed by the man-eater, for 
the previous night— the night the dog had been killed— the 
leopard had tried to break open the door of a house close to 
where, the next evening, the cow had been killed. On the road I 
found a number of men waiting for me who, knowing that the 
walk up from Rudraprayag would be a hot one, had very 
thoughtfully provided a dish of tea. While we sat in the shade of 
a mango tree and smoked, and I drank the dish of tea, they told 
me that the cow had not returned with the herd the previous 
evening, and that it had been found between the road and the 
river when a search had been made for it that morning. They 
also told me of the many hairbreadth escapes each of them had 
had from the man-eater during the past eight years. I was very 
interested to learn from them that the leopard had only 
adopted his present habit of trying— and in many cases 
succeeding— to break open the doors of houses three years 
previously, and that before he had been content to take people 
who were outside their houses, or from houses the doors of 
which had been left open. 'Now,' they said, 'the shaitan has 
become so bold that sometimes when he has not been able to 
break down the door of a house, he has dug a hole through the 
mud wall, and got at his victims in the way. 1 

To those who do not know our hill-people, or understand their 
fear of the supernatural, it will seem incredible that a people 
renowned for their courage, and who have won the highest 
awards on the field of battle, should permit a leopard to break 
open a door, or to dig a hole in a wall of a house, in which in 
many cases there must have been men with axes, kukris, or, 
even in some cases, firearms at hand. I know of only one case 
in all those eight long years in which resistance was offered to 
the man-eater, and in that case the resister was a woman. She 



was sleeping alone in a house, the door of which she had left 
unfastened; this door, as in the case of the door of the house 
occupied by the woman who escaped with a lacerated arm, 
opened inwards. On entering the room the leopard seized the 
woman's left leg, and as it dragged her across the room, the 
woman's hand came in contact with a gandesa— a tool used for 
chopping chaff for cattle— and with this the woman dealt the 
leopard a blow. The leopard did not release his hold, but 
backed out of the room, and as it did so either the woman 
pushed the door, or else this happened accidentally. Whichever 
it may have been, with the woman on one side of the door and 
the leopard on the other, the leopard exerted its great strength 
and tore the limb from the woman's body. Mukandi Lai, at that 
time Member for Garhwal in the United Provinces Legislative 
Council, who was on an electioneering tour, arrived in the 
village the following day and spent a night in the room, but the 
leopard did not return. In a report to the Council, Mukandi Lai 
stated that seventy-five human beings had been killed by the 
leopard in the course of that one year, and he asked the 
Government to launch a vigorous campaign against the man- 
eater. 

Accompanied by one of the villagers to show me the way, and 
by Madho Singh, I went down to the kill. The cow had been 
killed in a deep ravine a quarter of a mile from the road and a 
hundred yards from the river. On one side of the ravine there 
were big rocks with dense brushwood between, and on the 
other side of the ravine there were a few small trees, none of 
which was big enough to sit in. Under the trees, and about 
thirty yards from the kill, there was a rock with a little hollow 
at the base of it, so in the hollow I decided to sit. 

Both Madho Singh and the villager objected very strongly to 
my sitting on the ground, but as this was the first animal kill I 
had got since my arrival at Rudraprayag in a place where it 
was reasonable to expect the leopard to come at an early hour 
— about sundown— I overruled their objections, and sent them 
back to the village. 



My seat was dry and comfortable, and with my back to the rock 
and a small bush to conceal my legs I was confident the leopard 
would not see me, and that I should be able to kill it before it 
was aware of my presence. I had provided myself with a torch 
and a knife, and with my good rifle across my knees I felt that 
in this secluded spot my chances of killing the leopard were 
better than any I had yet had. 

Without movement and with my eyes on the rocks in front of 
me I sat through the evening, each second bringing the time 
nearer when the undisturbed and unsuspecting leopard would 
for a certainty return to his kill. The time I had been waiting for 
had come, and was passing. Objects near at hand were 
beginning to get blurred and indistinct. The leopard was a little 
later in coming than I had expected him to be, but that was not 
worrying me, for I had a torch, and the kill was only thirty 
yards from me, and I would be careful over my shot and make 
quite sure that I did not have a wounded animal to deal with. 

In the deep ravine there was absolute silence. The hot sun of 
the past few days had made the dead leaves on the bank on 
which I was sitting as dry as tinder. This was very reassuring, 
for it was now dark and whereas previously I had depended on 
my eyes for protection I now had to depend on my ears, and 
with thumb on the button of the torch and finger on trigger I 
was prepared to shoot in any direction in which I heard the 
slightest sound. 

The non-appearance of the leopard was beginning to cause me 
uneasiness. Was it possible that from some concealed place 
among the rocks he had been watching me all these hours, and 
was he now licking his lips in anticipation of burying his teeth 
in my throat?— for he had long been deprived of human flesh. 

In no other way could I account for his not having come, and if 
I were to have the good fortune to leave the ravine on my feet, 
my ears would have to serve me now as they had never served 
me before. 


For what seemed like hours I strained my ears and then. 



noticing it letting darker than it should have been, I turned my 
eyes up to the sky and saw that a heavy bank of clouds was 
drifting across the sky obscuring the stars one by one. Shortly 
thereafter big drops of rain started to fall, and where there had 
been absolute and complete silence there was now sound and 
movement all round— the opportunity the leopard had been 
waiting for had come. Hastily taking off my coat I wound it 
round my neck, fastening it securely in place with the sleeves. 
The rifle was now useless but might help to cause a diversion, 
so transferring it to my left hand I unsheathed my knife and got 
a good grip of it with my right hand. The knife was what is 
called an Afridi stabbing knife, and I devoutly hoped it would 
serve me as well as it had served its late owner, for when 
buying it from the Government store at Hangu on the North¬ 
west Frontier, the Deputy Commissioner had drawn my 
attention to a label attached to it and to three notches on the 
handle, and said it had figured in three murders. Admittedly a 
gruesome relic, but I was glad to have it in my hand, and I 
clutched it tight while the rain lashed down. 

Leopards, that is ordinary forest leopards, do not like rain and 
invariably seek shelter, but the man-eater was not an ordinary 
leopard, and there was no knowing what his likes or dislikes 
were, or what he might or might not do. 

When Madho Singh was leaving he asked how long I intended 
sitting up, and I had answered 'Until I have shot the leopard,' 
so I could expect no help from him, and of help I was at that 
time in urgent need. Should I go or should I remain were the 
questions that were troubling me, and one option was as 
unattractive as the other. If the leopard up to then had not seen 
me it would be foolish to give my position away, and possibly 
fall across him on the difficult ground I should have to 
negotiate on my way up to the pilgrim road. On the other hand 
to remain where I was for another six hours— momentarily 
expecting to have to fight for my life with an unfamiliar weapon 
— would put a strain on my nerves which they were not 
capable of standing; so getting to my feet and shouldering the 



rifle, I set off. 


I had not far to go, only about five hundred yards, half of which 
was over wet clay and the other half over rocks worn smooth 
by bare feet and the hooves of cattle. Afraid to use the torch for 
fear of attracting the man-eater, and with one hand occupied 
with the rifle and the other with the knife, my body made as 
many contacts with the ground as my rubber-shod feet. When I 
eventually reached the road I sent a full-throated cooee into the 
night, and a moment later I saw a door in the village far up the 
hillside open and Madho Singh and his companion emerge, 
carrying a lantern. 

When the two men joined me Madho Singh said he had had no 
uneasiness about me until the rain started, and that he had 
then lit the lantern, and sat with his ear against the door 
listening. Both men were willing to accompany me back to 
Rudraprayag, so we set out on our seven-mile walk, Bachi 
Singh leading, Madho Singh carrying the lantern following, and 
I bringing up the rear. When I returned next day I found the kill 
had not been touched, and on the road I found the tracks of the 
man-eater. What time had elapsed between our going down the 
road and the man-eater following us, it was not possible to say. 

When I look back on that night, I look back on it as my night of 
terror. I have been frightened times without number, but never 
have I been frightened as I was that night when the unexpected 
rain came down and robbed me of all my defences, and left me 
for protection a murderer's knife. 



Leopard Fights Leopard 

AFTER FOLLOWING US TO RUDRAPRAYAG THE leopard went 
down the pilgrim road through Golabrai, past the ravine up 
which he had gone a few days previously and then up a rough 
track which the people living on the hills to the east of 
Rudraprayag use as a short cut on their way to and from 
Hard war. 

The pilgrimage to Kedarnath and Badrinath is seasonal, and 
the commencement of the pilgrimage and its duration depend 
in the one case on the melting and in the other on the falling of 
snow in the upper reaches of the high mountains in which 
these two shrines are situated. The High Priest of Badrinath 
temple had a few days previously sent the telegram that is 
eagerly awaited by good Hindus throughout the length and 
breadth of India, announcing that the road was open, and for 
the past few days pilgrims in small numbers had been passing 
through Rudraprayag. 

During the past few years the man-eater had killed several 
pilgrims on the road, and it appeared to be his more or less 
regular habit while the pilgrim season lasted to go down the 
road to the extent of his beat, and then circle round through 
the villages on the hills to the east of Rudraprayag, and rejoin 
the Road anything up to fifteen miles above Rudraprayag. The 
time taken for this round trip varied, but on an average I had 
seen the leopard's tracks on the stretch of road between 
Rudraprayag and Golabrai once in every five days, so on my 
way back to the Inspection 

Bungalow I selected a place from where I could overlook the 
road, and for the next two nights sat in great comfort on a 
hayrick, without however seeing anything of the leopard. 

I received no news of the man-eater from outlying villages for 
two days, and on the third morning I went down the pilgrim 
road for six miles to try to find out if he had recently visited any 
of the villages in the direction. From this twelve-mile walk I 



returned at midday; and while I was having a late breakfast two 
men arrived and reported that a boy had been killed the 
previous evening at Bhainswara, a village eighteen miles south¬ 
east of Rudraprayag. 

The intelligence system introduced by Ibbotson was working 
splendidly Under this system cash rewards, on a graduated 
scale, were paid for information about all kills in the area in 
which the man-eater was operating. These rewards, starting 
with two rupees for a goat and working up to twenty rupees for 
a human being, were keenly contested for, and so ensured our 
receiving information about all kills in the shortest time 
possible. 

When I put ten rupees into the hands of each of the men who 
had brought me news about the boy, one of them offered to 
accompany me back to Bhainswara to show me the way, while 
the other said he would stay the night at Rudraprayag as he 
had recently had fever and could not do another eighteen miles 
that day. I finished breakfast while the men were telling me 
their tale, and a little before 1 p.m. I set off, taking only my 
rifle, a few cartridges, and a torch with me. As we crossed the 
road near the Inspection Bungalow and started up the steep 
hill on the far side of it, my companion informed me we had a 
very long way to go, adding that it would not be safe for us to 
be out after dark, so I told him to walk ahead and set the pace. 

I never— if I can help it— walk uphill immediately after a meal, 
but here I had no option, and for the first three miles, in which 
we climbed four thousand feet, I had great difficulty in keeping 
up with my guide. A short stretch of comparatively flat ground 
at the end of the three miles gave me back my wind, and after 
that I walked ahead and set the pace. 

On their way to Rudraprayag the two men had told the people 
in the villages they had passed through about the kill, and of 
their intention to try and persuade me to accompany them back 
to Bhainswara. I do not think that anyone doubted that I would 
answer to the call, for at every village the entire population 



were waiting for me, and while some gave me their blessings, 
others begged me not to leave the district until I had killed 
their enemy. 

My companion had assured me that we had eighteen miles to 
go, and as we crested hill after hill with deep valleys between I 
realized I had undertaken to walk against time eighteen of the 
longest and hardest miles I had ever walked. The sun was near 
setting when, from the crest of one of these unending hills, I 
saw a number of men standing on a ridge a few hundred yards 
ahead of us. On catching sight of us some of the men 
disappeared over the ridge, while others came forward to meet 
us. The headman of Bhainswara was among the latter, and after 
he had greeted me, he cheered me by telling me that his village 
was just over the crest of the hill, and that he had sent his son 
back to get tea ready. 

The 14th of April 1926 is a date that will long be remembered 
in Garhwal, for it was on that day that the man-eating leopard 
of Rudraprayag killed his last human victim. On the evening of 
that day a widow and her two children, a girl aged nine and a 
boy aged twelve, accompanied by a neighbour's son aged eight, 
went to a spring a few yards from Bhainswara village to draw 
water for the preparation of their evening meal. 

The widow and her children occupied a house in the middle of 
a long row of homesteads. These homesteads were double¬ 
storied, the low-ceilinged ground floor being used for the 
storage of grain and fuel, and the first floor for residences. A 
veranda four feet wide ran the entire length of the building, 
and short flights of stone steps flanked by walls gave access to 
the veranda, each flight of steps being used by two families. A 
flagged courtyard, sixty feet wide and three hundred feet long, 
bordered by a low wall, extended along the whole length of the 
building. 

The neighbour's son was leading as the party of four 
approached the steps used by the widow and her children, and 
as the boy started to mount the steps he saw an animal, which 



he mistook for a dog, lying in an open room on the ground floor 
adjoining the steps; he said nothing about the animal at the 
time, and the others apparently did not see it. The boy was 
followed by the girl, the widow came next, and her son brought 
up the rear. When she was half-way up the short flight of stone 
steps, the mother heard the heavy brass vessel her son was 
carrying crash on the steps and go rolling down them; 
reprimanding him for his carelessness, she set her own vessel 
down on the veranda and turned to see what damage her son 
had done. At the bottom of the steps she saw the overturned 
vessel. She went down and picked it up, and then looked round 
for her son. As he was nowhere in sight she assumed he had 
got frightened and had run away, so she started calling to him. 

Neighbours in adjoining houses had heard the noise made by 
the falling vessel and now, hearing the mother calling to her 
son, they came to their doors and asked what all the trouble 
was about. It was suggested that the boy might be hiding in 
one of the ground-floor rooms, so as it was now getting dark in 
these rooms, a man lit a lantern and came down the steps 
towards the woman, and as he did so he saw drops of blood on 
the flagstones where the woman was standing. At the sound of 
the man's horrified ejaculation other people descended into the 
courtyard, among whom was an old man who had accompanied 
his master on many shooting expeditions. Taking the lantern 
from the owner's hand, this old man followed the blood trail 
across the courtyard and over the low wall. Beyond the wall 
was a drop of eight feet into a yam field; here in the soft earth 
were the splayed-out pug-marks of a leopard. Up to that 
moment no one suspected that the boy had been carried off by 
a man-eater, for though everyone had heard about the leopard 
it had never previously been within ten miles of their village. As 
soon as they realized what had happened the women began 
screaming and while some men ran to their houses for drums, 
others ran for guns— of which there were three in the village 
and in a few minutes pandemonium broke out. Throughout the 
night drums were beaten and guns were fired. At daylight the 



boy's body was recovered, and two men were dispatched to 
Rudraprayag to inform me. 

As I approached the village in company with the headman, I 
heard the wailing of a woman mourning her dead. It was the 
mother of the victim, and she was the first to greet me. Even to 
my unpractised eye it was apparent that the bereaved mother 
had just weathered one hysterical storm and was heading for 
another, and as I lack the art of dealing with people in this 
condition I was anxious to spare the woman a recital of the 
events of the previous evening; but she appeared to be eager to 
give me her version of the story, so I let her have her way. As 
the story unfolded itself it was apparent that her object in 
telling it was to ventilate her grievance against the men of the 
village for not having run after the leopard and rescued her son 
'as his father would have done had he been alive'. In her 
accusation against the men I told her she was unjust, and in 
her belief that her son could have been rescued alive, I told her 
she was wrong. For when the leopard clamped his teeth round 
the boy's throat, the canine teeth dislocated the head from the 
neck and the boy was already dead before the leopard carried 
him across the courtyard, and nothing the assembled men— or 
anyone else— could have done would have been of any use. 

Standing in the courtyard drinking the tea that had 
thoughtfully been provided for me, and noting the hundred or 
more people who were gathered round, it was difficult to 
conceive how an animal the size of a leopard had crossed the 
courtyard in daylight without being seen by any of the people 
who must have been moving about at that time, or how its 
presence had gone undetected by the dogs in the village. 

I climbed down the eight-foot wall that the leopard carrying the 
boy had jumped down, and followed the drag across the yam 
field, down another wall twelve feet high, and across another 
field. At the edge of this second field there was a thick hedge of 
rambler roses, four feet high. Here the leopard had released 
his hold on the boy's throat, and after searching for an opening 



in the hedge and not finding one, he had picked the boy up by 
the small of the back and, leaping the hedge, gone down a wall 
ten feet high on the far side. There was a cattle track at the 
foot of this third wall and the leopard had only gone a short 
distance along it when the alarm was raised in the village. The 
leopard had then dropped the boy on the cattle track and gone 
down the hill. He was prevented from returning to his kill by 
the beating of drums and the firing of guns which had gone on 
all night in the village. 

The obvious thing for me to have done would have been to 
carry the body of the boy back to where the leopard had left it, 
and to have sat over it there. But here I was faced with two 
difficulties— the absence of a suitable place in which to sit, and 
my aversion to sitting in an unsuitable place. 

The nearest tree, a leafless walnut, was three hundred yards 
away, and was therefore out of the question, and quite frankly I 
lacked the courage to sit on the ground. I had arrived at the 
village at sundown; it had taken a little time to drink the tea, 
hear the mother's story, and trail the leopard, and there was 
not sufficient daylight left for me to construct a shelter that 
would have given me even the semblance of protection; 
therefore if I sat on the ground I should have to sit just 
anywhere, not knowing from which direction the leopard would 
come, and knowing full well that if the leopard attacked me I 
should get no opportunity of using the one weapon with which I 
was familiar, my rifle, for when in actual contact with an 
unwounded leopard or tiger it is not possible to use firearms. 

When after my tour of inspection I returned to the courtyard, I 
asked the headman for a crowbar, a stout wooden peg, a 
hammer, and a dog chain. With the crowbar I prised up one of 
the flagstones in the middle of the courtyard, drove the peg 
firmly into the ground, and fastened one end of the chain to it. 
Then with the help of the headman I carried the body of the 
boy to the peg and chained it there. 

The working of the intangible force which sets a period to life. 



which one man calls Fate and another calls kismet, is 
incomprehensible. During the past few days this force had set a 
period to the life of a breadwinner, leaving his family destitute; 
had ended in a very painful way the days of an old lady who 
after a lifetime of toil was looking forward to a few short wars 
of comparative comfort; and now, had cut short the life of this 
boy who, by the look of him, had been nurtured with care by 
his widowed mother. Small wonder then that the bereaved 
mother should, in between her hysterical crying, be repeating 
over and over and over again, 'What crime, Parmeshwar, has 
my son, who was loved by all, committed that on the threshold 
of life he has deserved death in this terrible way?' 

Before prising up the flagstone, I had asked for the mother and 
her daughter to be taken to a room at the very end of the row 
of buildings. My preparations completed, I washed at the 
spring and asked for a bundle of straw, which I laid on the 
veranda in front of the door of the house vacated by the 
mother. 

Darkness had now fallen. Having asked the assembled people 
to be as silent during the night as it was possible for them to be 
and sent them to their respective homes, I took up my position 
on the veranda, where by lying prone on my side and heaping a 
little straw in front, I could get a clear view of the kill without 
much chance of being seen myself. 

In spite of all the noise that had been made the previous night, 

I had a feeling that the leopard would return, and that when he 
failed to find his kill where he had left it, he would come to the 
village to try to secure another victim. The ease with which he 
had got his first victim at Bhainswara would encourage him to 
try again, and I started my vigil with high hopes. 

Heavy clouds had been gathering all the evening, and at 8 p.m., 
when all the village sound— except the wailing of the woman— 
were hushed, a flash of lightning followed by a distant roll of 
thunder heralded an approaching storm. For an hour the storm 
raged, the lightning being so continuous and brilliant that had 



a rat ventured into the courtyard I should have seen and 
probably been able to shoot it. The rain eventually stopped but, 
the sky remaining overcast, visibility was reduced to a few 
inches. The time had now come for the leopard to start from 
wherever he had been sheltering from the storm, and the time 
of his arrival would depend on the distance of that place from 
the village. 

The woman had now stopped wailing, and in all the world there 
appeared to be no sound. This was as I had hoped, for all I had 
to warn me that the leopard had come were my ears, and to 
help them I had used the dog chain instead of a rope. 

The straw that had been provided for me was as dry as tinder 
and my ears, straining into the black darkness, first heard the 
sound when it was level with my feet— something was 
creeping, very stealthily creeping, over the straw on which I 
was lying. I was wearing an article of clothing called shorts, 
which left my legs bare in the region of my knees. Presently, 
against this bare skin, I felt the hairy coat of an animal 
brushing. It could only be the man-eater, creeping up until he 
could lean over and get a grip of my throat. A little pressure 
now on my left shoulder— to get a foothold— and then, just as I 
was about to press the trigger of the rifle to cause a diversion, 
a small animal jumped down between my arms and my chest. It 
was a little kitten, soaking wet, that had been caught out in the 
storm and, finding every door shut, had come to me for warmth 
and protection. 

The kitten had hardly made itself comfortable inside my coat, 
and I was just beginning to recover from the fright it had given 
me, when from beyond the terraced fields there was some low 
growling which gradually grew louder, and then merged into 
the most savage fight I have ever heard. Quite evidently the 
man-eater had returned to the spot where the previous night 
he had left his kill, and while he was searching for it, in not too 
good a temper, another male leopard who looked upon this 
particular area as his hunting-ground, had accidentally come 



across him and set on him. Fights of the nature of the one that 
was taking place in my hearing are very unusual, for carnivores 
invariably keep to their own areas, and if by chance two of the 
same sex happen to meet, they size up each other's capabilities 
at a glance, and the weaker gives way to the stronger. 

The man-eater, though old, was a big and a very powerful male, 
and in the five hundred square miles he ranged over there was 
possibly no other male capable of disputing his rule, but here at 
Bhainswara he was a stranger and a trespasser, and to get out 
of the trouble he had brought on himself he would have to fight 
for his life. And this he was undoubtedly doing. 

My chance of getting a shot had now gone, for even if the man- 
eater succeeded in defeating his attacker, his injuries would 
probably prevent him from taking any interest in kills for some 
time to come. There was even a possibility of the fight ending 
fatally for him, and here would indeed be an unexpected end to 
his career: killed in an accidental encounter by one of his own 
kind, when the combined efforts of the Government and the 
public had failed, over a period of eight years, to accomplish 
this end. 

The first round, lasting about five minutes, was fought with 
unabating savagery, and was inconclusive, for at the end of it I 
could still hear both animals. After an interval of ten or fifteen 
minutes the fight was resumed, but at a distance of two to 
three hundred yards from where it had originally started; quite 
evidently the local champion was getting the better of the fight 
and was gradually driving the intruder out of the ring. The 
third round was shorter than the two that had preceded it, but 
was no less savage, and when after another long period of 
silence the fight was again resumed, the scene had receded to 
the shoulder of the hill, where after a few minutes it died out of 
hearing. 

There were still six hours of darkness left; even so I knew my 
mission to Bhainswara had failed, and that my hope that the 
fight would be fought to a finish and would end in the death of 



the man-eater had been short-lived. In the running fight into 
which the contest had now degenerated the man-eater would 
sustain injuries, but they were not likely to reduce his craving 
for human flesh or impair his ability to secure it. 

The kitten slept peacefully throughout the night, and as the 
first streak of dawn showed in the east I descended into the 
courtyard and carried the boy to the shed from where we had 
removed him, and covered him with the blanket which 
previously had been used for the purpose. The headman was 
still asleep when I knocked on his door. I declined the tea, 
which I knew would take some time to make, and assured him 
that the man-eater would never again visit his village; and 
when he had promised to make immediate arrangements to 
have the boy carried to the burning-ghat, I set off on my long 
walk back to Rudraprayag. 

No matter how often we fail in any endeavour, we never get 
used to the feeling of depression that assails us after each 
successive failure. Day after day over a period of months I had 
left the Inspection Bungalow full of hope that on this particular 
occasion I would meet with success, and day after day I had 
returned disappointed and depressed. Had my failures only 
concerned myself they would not have mattered, but in the task 
I had undertaken those failures concerned others more than 
they concerned me. Bad luck— for to nothing else could I 
attribute my failures— was being meted out to me in ever- 
increasing measure, and the accumulated effect was beginning 
to depress me and give me the feeling that I was not destined 
to do what I had set out to do. What but bad luck had made the 
man-eater drop his kill where there were no trees? And what 
but bad luck had made a leopard who possibly had thirty 
sguare miles in which to wander, arrive at a particular spot in 
those thirty miles just as the man-eater, not finding his kill 
where he had left it, was guite conceivably on his way to the 
village where I was waiting for him? 

The eighteen miles had been long yesterday but they were 



longer today and the hills were steeper. In the villages I passed 
through the people were eagerly awaiting me, and though I 
only had bad news they did not show their disappointment. 
Their boundless faith in their philosophy a faith strong enough 
to move mountains and very soothing to depressed feelings, 
that no human beings and no animals can die before their 
appointed time, and that the man-eater's time had not yet 
come, called for no explanation, and admitted of no argument. 

Ashamed of the depression and feeling of frustration that I had 
permitted to accompany me throughout the morning, I left the 
last village— where I had been made to halt and drink a cup of 
tea— greatly cheered, and as I swung down the last four miles 
to Rudraprayag I became aware that I was treading on the pug- 
marks of the man-eater. Strange how one's mental condition 
can dull, or sharpen, one's powers of observation. The man- 
eater had quite possibly joined the track many miles farther 
back, and now, after my conversation with the simple village- 
folk and a drink of tea— I was seeing his pug-marks for the first 
time that morning. The track here ran over red clay which the 
rain had softened, and the pug marks of the man-eater showed 
that he was walking at his accustomed pace. Half a mile farther 
on he started to quicken his pace, and this pace he continued 
to maintain until he reached the head of the ravine above 
Golabrai; down this ravine the leopard had gone. 

When a leopard or tiger is walking at its normal pace only the 
imprints of the hind feet are seen, but when the normal pace is 
for any reason exceeded, the hind feet are placed on the 
ground in advance of the forefeet, and thus the imprints of all 
four feet are seen. From the distance between the imprints of 
the fore and the hind feet it is possible to determine the speed 
at which an animal of the cat tribe was travelling. The coming 
of daylight would in this instance have been sufficient reason 
for the man-eater to have quickened his pace. 

I had previously had experience of the man-eater's walking 
capabilities, but only when ranging his beat in search of food. 



Here he had a better reason for the long walk he had 
undertaken, for he was anxious to put as great a distance as 
possible between himself and the leopard who had given him a 
lesson in the law of trespass; how severe that lesson had been 
will be apparent from a description given later. 



A Shot in the Dark 

MEALTIMES IN INDIA VARY ACCORDING TO the season of 
the year and individual tastes. In most establishments the 
recognized times for the three principal meals are: breakfast, 8 
to 9; lunch, 1 to 2; and dinner, 8 to 9. During all the months I 
was at Rudraprayag my mealtimes were very erratic, and 
contrary to the accepted belief that health depends on the 
composition and regularity of meals, my unorthodox and 
irregular meals kept me fighting fit. Porridge supped at 8 p.m., 
soup taken at 8 a.m., one combined meal in the day or no meal 
at all, appeared to have no injurious effect beyond taking a 
little flesh off my bones. 

I had eaten nothing since my breakfast the previous day, so as I 
intended spending the night out I had a nondescript meal on 
my return from Bhainswara, and after an hour's sleep and a 
bath set off for Golabrai to warn the pundit who owned the 
pilgrim shelter of the presence in his vicinity of the man-eater. 

I had made friends with the pundit on my first arrival at 
Rudraprayag and I never passed his house without having a 
few words with him, for in addition to the many interesting 
tales he had to tell about the man-eater and the pilgrims who 
passed through Golabrai, he was one of the only two people— 
the woman who escaped with the lacerated arm being the 
other— whom I met during my stay in Garhwal who had 
survived an encounter with the man-eater. 

One of his tales concerned a woman who had lived in a village 
further down the road, and with whom he had been acquainted. 
After a visit to the Rudraprayag bazaar one day this woman 
arrived at Golabrai late in the evening, and fearing she would 
not be able to reach her home before dark she asked 
the pundit to let her spend the night in his shelter. This he 
permitted her to do advising her to sleep in front of the door of 
the storeroom in which he kept the articles of food purchased 
by the pilgrims, for, he said, she would then be protected by the 
room on the one side, and by the fifty or more pilgrims who 



were spending the night in the shelter on the other. 

The shelter was a grass shed open on the side nearest the road, 
and boarded up on the side nearest the hill; the store-room was 
midway along the shed, but was recessed into the hill and did 
not obstruct the floor of the shed, so when the woman lay down 
at the door of the store-room there were rows of pilgrims 
between her and the road. Some time during the night one of 
the women pilgrims screamed out and said she had been stung 
by a scorpion. No lights were available, but with the help of 
matches the woman's foot was examined and a small scratch 
from which a little blood was flowing was found on her foot. 
Grumbling that the woman had made a lot of fuss about 
nothing, and that in any case blood did not flow from a 
scorpion sting, the pilgrims soon composed themselves and 
resumed their sleep. 

In the morning, when the pundit arrived from his house on the 
hill above the mango tree, he saw a sari worn by hill-women 
lying on the road in front of the shelter, and on the sari there 
was blood. The pundit had given his friend what he considered 
to be the safest place in the shelter, and with fifty or more 
pilgrims lying all round her the leopard had walked over the 
sleeping people, killed the woman, and accidentally scratched 
the sleeping pilgrim's foot when returning to the road. The 
explanation given by the pundit as to why the leopard had 
rejected the pilgrims and carried off the hill-woman was that 
she was the only person in the shelter that night who was 
wearing a coloured garment. This explanation is not 
convincing, and but for the fact that leopards do not hunt by 
scent, my own explanation would have been that of all the 
people in the shelter the hill-woman was the only one who had 
a familiar smell. Was it just bad luck, or fate, or being the only 
one of all the sleepers who realized the danger of sleeping in 
an open shed? Had the victim's fear in some inexplicable way 
conveyed itself to the man-eater, and attracted him to her? 

It was not long after this occurrence that the pundit had his 



own encounter with the man-eater. The exact date— which 
could if desired be ascertained from the hospital records at 
Rudraprayag— is immaterial, and for the purpose of my story it 
will be sufficient to say that it took place during the hottest 
part of the summer of 1921, that is four years before I met 
the pundit. Late one evening of that summer ten pilgrims from 
Madras arrived weary and footsore at Golabrai, and expressed 
their intention of spending the night in the pilgrim shelter. 
Fearing that if any more people were killed at Golabrai his 
shelter would get a bad reputation, the pundittried to persuade 
them to continue on for another two miles to Rudraprayag, 
where they would be ensured of safe accommodation. Finding 
that nothing he could say had any effect on the tired pilgrims, 
he finally consented to give them accommodation in his house, 
which was fifty yards above the mango-tree to which I have 
already drawn attention. 

The pundit's house was built on the same plan as the 
homesteads at Bhainswara; a low ground-floor room used for 
storage of fuel, and a first-floor room used as a residence. A 
short flight of stone steps gave access to a narrow veranda, the 
door of the residential room being opposite to the landing at 
the top of the steps. 

After the pundit and the ten guests that had been forced on 
him had eaten their evening meal, they locked themselves into 
the room, which was not provided with any means of 
ventilation. The heat in the room was stifling, and fearing that 
he would be suffocated the pundit some time during the night 
opened the door, stepped outside, and stretched his hands to 
the pillars on either side of the steps supporting the roof of the 
veranda. As he did so and filled his lungs with the night air, his 
throat was gripped as in a vice. Retaining his hold on the 
pillars, he got the soles of his feet against the body of his 
assailant and with a desperate kick tore the leopard's teeth 
from his throat, and hurled it down the steps. Then, fearing 
that he was going to faint, he took a step sideways and 
supported himself by putting both hands on the railing of the 



veranda, and the moment he did so the leopard sprang up from 
below and buried its claws in his left forearm. The downward 
pull was counteracted by the railing on which the pundit had 
the palm of his hand, and the weight of the leopard caused its 
sharp claws to rip through the flesh of his arm until they tore 
free at his wrist. Before the leopard was able to spring a 
second time, the pilgrims, hearing the terrifying sounds 
the pundit was making in his attempts to breathe through the 
gap torn in his throat, dragged him into the room and bolted 
the door. For the rest of that long hot night the pundit lay 
gasping for breath and bleeding profusely, while the leopard 
growled and clawed at the frail door, and the pilgrims 
screamed with terror. 

At daylight the pilgrims carried the pundit, now mercifully 
unconscious, to a Kalakamli hospital at Rudraprayag, where for 
three months he was fed through a silver tube inserted in his 
throat. After an absence of over six months he returned to his 
home in Golabrai, broken in health and with his hair turned 
grey. Photographs were taken five years later, and scarcely 
show the leopard's teeth-marks on the left side of 
the pundit's face and in his throat, and its claw-marks on his 
left arm, though they were still clearly visible. 

In his conversations with me the pundit always referred to the 
man-eater as an evil spirit, and after the first day, when he had 
asked me what proof I could give him in face of his own 
experience that evil spirits could not assume material form, I 
also, to humour him, referred to the man-eater as 'the evil 
spirit'. 

On arrival at Golabrai that evening I told the pundit of my 
fruitless visit to Bhainswara, and warned him to take extra 
precautions for his safety and for the safety of any pilgrims who 
might be staying in his shelter; for the evil spirit, after its long 
excursion into the hills, had now returned to the vicinity. 

That night, and for the following three nights, I sat on the 
haystack, keeping a watch on the road; and on the fourth day 



Ibbotson returned from Pauri. 


Ibbotson always infused new life into me, for his creed, like 
that of the locals, was that no one was to blame if the man- 
eater had not died yesterday, for surely it would die today or 
maybe tomorrow. I had a lot to tell him, for though I had 
corresponded with him regularly— extracts from my letters 
being embodied in his reports to the Government, and by them 
made available to the press— I had not been able to give him 
all the details which he was now eager to hear. On his part 
Ibbotson also had a lot to tell me; this concerned the clamour 
being made in the press for the destruction of the man-eater, 
and the suggestion that sportsmen from all parts of India be 
encouraged to go to Garhwal to assist in killing the leopard. 
This press campaign had resulted in Ibbotson receiving only 
one inquiry, and only one suggestion. The inquiry was from a 
sportsman who said that, if arrangements for his travel, 
accommodation, food, and so on, were made to his satisfaction, 
he would consider whether it was worth his while to come to 
Golabrai; and the suggestion was from a sportsman in whose 
opinion the speediest and easiest way of killing the leopard was 
to paint a goat over with arsenic, sew up its mouth to prevent it 
licking itself, and then tie it up in a place where the leopard 
would find and eat it, and so poison itself. 

We talked long that day, reviewing my many failures in 
minutest detail, and by lunch-time, when I had told Ibbotson of 
the leopard's habit of going down the road between 
Rudraprayag and Golabrai on an average once in every five 
days, I convinced him that the only hope I now had of shooting 
the leopard was by sitting over the road for ten nights, for, as I 
pointed out to him, the leopard would be almost certain to use 
the road at least once during the period. Ibbotson consented to 
my plan very reluctantly, for I had already sat up many nights 
and he was afraid that another ten on end would be too much 
for me. However, I carried my point, and then told Ibbotson 
that if I did not succeed in killing the leopard within the 
stipulated time, I would return to Naini Tal and leave the field 



free for any new-comers who might consider it worth their 
while to take my place. 

That evening Ibbotson accompanied me to Golabrai and helped 
me to put up a machan in the mango tree a hundred yards from 
the pilgrim shelter and fifty yards below the pundit's house. 
Immediately below the tree, and in the middle of the road, we 
drove a stout wooden peg, and to this peg we tethered a goat 
with a small bell round its neck. The moon was nearly at its 
full; even so, the high hill to the east of Golabrai only admitted 
of the moon lighting up the deep Ganges valley for a few hours, 
and if the leopard came while it was dark the goat would warn 
me of his approach. 

When all our preparations had been made Ibbotson returned to 
the bungalow, promising to send two of my men for me early 
next morning. While I sat on a rock near the foot of the tree 
and smoked and waited for night to close in, the pundit came 
and sat down beside me; he was a bhakti and did not smoke. 
Earlier in the evening he had seen us building the machan, and 
he now tried to dissuade me from sitting all night in the tree 
when I could sleep comfortably in bed. Nevertheless, I assured 
him I would sit all that night in the tree, and for nine nights 
thereafter, for if I was not able to kill the evil spirit I could at 
least guard his house and the pilgrim shelter from attack by all 
enemies. Once during the night a kakar barked on the hill 
above me, but thereafter the night was silent. At sunrise next 
morning two of my men arrived, and I set off for the Inspection 
Bungalow, examining the road as I went for pug-marks, and 
leaving the men to follow with my rug and rifle. 

During the following nine days my programme did not vary. 
Leaving the bungalow accompanied by two men in the early 
evening, I took up my position in the machan and sent the men 
away in time for them to get back to the bungalow before dusk. 
The men had strict orders not to leave the bungalow before it 
was fully light, and they arrived each morning as the sun was 
rising on the hills on the far side of the river and accompanied 



me back to the bungalow. 

During all those ten nights the barking of the kakar on the first 
night was all that I heard. That the man-eater was still in the 
vicinity we had ample proof, for twice within those ten nights it 
had broken into houses and carried off, on the first occasion, a 
goat and, on the second occasion, a sheep. I found both kills 
with some difficulty for they had been carried a long distance, 
but neither had been of any use to me as they had been eaten 
out. Once also during those ten nights the leopard had broken 
down the door of a house which, fortunately for the inmates, 
had two rooms, the door of the inner room being sufficiently 
strong to withstand the leopard's onslaught. 

On return to the bungalow after my tenth night in the mango 
tree, Ibbotson and I discussed our future plans. No further 
communications had been received from the sportsman, no one 
else had expressed a desire to accept the Government's 
invitation, and no one had responded to the appeals made by 
the press. Neither Ibbotson nor I could afford to spend more 
time at Rudraprayag; Ibbotson because he had been away from 
his headguarters for ten days and it was necessary for him to 
return to Pauri to attend to urgent work; and I because I had 
work to do in Africa and had delayed my departure for three 
months and could not delay it any longer. Both of us were 
reluctant to leave Garhwal to the tender mercies of the man- 
eater and yet, situated as we were, it was hard to decide what 
to do. One solution was for Ibbotson to apply for leave, and for 
me to cancel my passage to Africa and cut my losses. We finally 
agreed to leave the decision over for that night, and to decide 
on our line of action next morning. Having come to this 
decision I told Ibbotson I would spend my last night in Garhwal 
in the mango tree. 

Ibbotson accompanied me on that eleventh, and last, evening, 
and as we approached Golabrai we saw a number of men 
standing on the side of the road, looking down into a field a 
little beyond the mango tree; the men had not seen us and 



before we got up to them they turned and moved off towards 
the pilgrim shelter. One of them however looked back, and 
seeing me beckoning retraced his steps. In answer to our 
questions he said he and his companions had for an hour been 
watching a great fight between two big snakes down in the 
field. No crops appeared to have been grown there for a year 
or more, and the snakes had last been seen near the big rock in 
the middle of the field. There were smears of blood on this 
rock, and the man said they had been made by the snakes, 
which had bitten each other and were bleeding in several 
places. Having broken a stick from a nearby bush, I jumped 
down into the field to see if there were any holes near the rock, 
and as I did so I caught sight of the snakes in a bush just below 
the road. Ibbotson had in the meantime armed himself with a 
stout stick, and as one of the snakes tried to climb up on to the 
road he killed it. The other one disappeared into a hole in the 
bank from where we were unable to dislodge it. The snake 
Ibbotson had killed was about seven feet long and of a uniform 
light straw colour, and on its neck it had several bites. It was 
not a rat snake, and as it had very pronounced poison fangs we 
concluded it was some variety of hoodless cobra. Cold-blooded 
creatures are not immune to snake poison, for I have seen a 
frog bitten by a cobra die in a few minutes, but I do not know if 
snakes of the same variety can poison each other, and the one 
that escaped into the hole may have died in a few minutes or it 
may have lived to die of old age. 

After Ibbotson left, the pundit passed under my tree on his way 
to the pilgrim shelter, carrying a pail of milk. He informed me 
that a hundred and fifty pilgrims, who had arrived during the 
day, were determined to spend the night in his shelter and that 
he was powerless to do anything about it. It was then too late 
for me to take any action, so I told him to warn the pilgrims to 
keep close together and not on any account to move about after 
dark. When he hurried back to his house a few minutes later, 
he said he had warned the pilgrims accordingly. 

In a field adjoining the road, and about a hundred yards from 



my tree, there was a thorn enclosure in which a packman— not 
my old friend— earlier in the evening had penned his flock of 
goats and sheep. With the packman were two dogs who had 
barked very fiercely at us as we came down the road, and at 
Ibbotson after he left me to go back to the bungalow. 

The moon was a few days past the full, and the valley was in 
darkness when, a little after 9 p.m., I saw a man carrying a 
lantern leave the pilgrim shelter and cross the road. A minute 
or two later, he recrossed the road and on gaining the shelter 
extinguished the lantern and at the same moment the 
packman's dogs started barking furiously. The dogs were 
unmistakably barking at a leopard, which quite possibly had 
seen the man with the lantern and was now coming down the 
road on its way to the shelter. 

At first the dogs barked in the direction of the road, but after a 
little while they turned and barked in my direction. The leopard 
had now quite evidently caught sight of the sleeping goat and 
lain down out of sight of the dogs— which had stopped barking 
— to consider his next move. I knew that the leopard had 
arrived, and I also knew that he was using my tree to stalk the 
goat, and the question that was tormenting me as the long 
minutes dragged by was whether he would skirt round the goat 
and kill one of the pilgrims, or whether he would kill the goat 
and give me a shot. 

During all the nights I had sat in the tree I adopted a position 
that would enable me to discharge my rifle with the minimum 
of movement and in the minimum of time. The distance 
between the goat and my machanwas about twenty feet, but 
the night was so dark under the dense foliage of the tree that 
my straining eyes could not penetrate even this short distance, 
so I closed them and concentrated on my hearing. 

My rifle, to which I had a small electric torch attached, was 
pointing in the direction of the goat, and I was just beginning 
to think that the leopard—assuming it was the man-eater- 
had reached the shelter and was selecting a human victim. 



when there was a rush from the foot of the tree, and the goat's 
bell tinkled sharply. Pressing the button of the torch I saw that 
the sights of the rifle were aligned on the shoulder of a leopard, 
and without having to move the rifle a fraction of an inch I 
pressed the trigger, and as I did so the torch went out. 

Torches in those days were not in as general use as they are 
now, and mine was the first I had ever possessed. I had carried 
it for several months and never had occasion to use it, and I did 
not know the life of the battery, or that it was necessary to test 
it. When I pressed the button on this occasion the torch gave 
only one dim flash and then went out, and I was again in 
darkness without knowing what the result of my shot had been. 

The echo of my shot was dying away in the valley when 
the pundit opened his door and called out to ask if I needed any 
help. I was at the time listening with all my ears for any sounds 
that might come from the leopard, so I did not answer him, and 
he hurriedly shut his door. 

The leopard had been lying across the road with his head away 
from me when I fired, and I was vaguely aware of his having 
sprung over the goat and gone down the hillside, and just 
before the pundit had called I thought I heard what may have 
been a gurgling sound, but of this I could not be sure. The 
pilgrims had been aroused by my shot but, after murmuring for 
a few minutes, they resumed their sleep. The goat appeared to 
be unhurt, for from the sound of his bell I could tell that he was 
moving about and apparently eating the grass of which he was 
given a liberal supply each night. 

I had fired my shot at 10 p.m. As the moon was not due to rise 
for several hours, and as there was nothing I could do in the 
meantime, I made myself comfortable, and listened and 
smoked. 

Hours later the moon lit up the crest of the hills on the far side 
of the Ganges and slowly crept down into the valley, and a little 
later I saw it rise over the top of the hill behind me. As soon as 



it was overhead I climbed to the top of the tree, but found that 
the spreading branches impeded my view. Descending again to 
the machan, I climbed out on the branches spreading over the 
road, but from here also I found it was not possible to see down 
the hillside in the direction in which I thought the leopard had 
gone. It was then 3 a.m., and two hours later the moon began 
to pale. When nearby objects became visible in the light of the 
day that was being born in the east, I descended from the tree 
and was greeted by a friendly bleat from the goat. 

Beyond the goat, and at the very edge of the road, there was a 
long low rock, and on this rock there was an inch-wide streak 
of blood; the leopard from which that blood had come could 
only have lived a minute or two, so dispensing with the 
precautions usually taken when following up the blood trail of 
carnivores, I scrambled down off the road and, taking up the 
trail on the far side of the rock, followed it for fifty yards, to 
where the leopard was lying dead. He had slid backwards into 
a hole in the ground, in which he was now lying crouched up, 
with his chin resting on the edge of the hole. 

No marks by which I could identify the dead animal were 
visible, even so I never for one moment doubted that the 
leopard in the hole was the man-eater. But here was no fiend, 
who while watching me through the long night hours had 
rocked and rolled with silent fiendish laughter at my vain 
attempts to outwit him, and licked his lips in anticipation of the 
time when, finding me off my guard for one brief moment, he 
would get the opportunity he was waiting for of burying his 
teeth in my throat. Here was only an old leopard, who differed 
from others of his kind in that his muzzle was grey and his lips 
lacked whiskers; the best-hated and the most feared animal in 
all India, whose only crime— not against the laws of nature, but 
against the laws of man— was that he had shed human blood, 
with no object of terrorizing man, but only in order that he 
might live; and who now, with his chin resting on the rim of the 
hole and his eyes half-closed, was peacefully sleeping his long 
last sleep. 



While I stood unloading my rifle, one bullet from which had 
more than cancelled my personal score against the sleeper, I 
heard a cough, and on looking up saw the pundit peering down 
at me from the edge of the road. I beckoned to him and he 
came gingerly down the hill. On catching sight of the leopard's 
head he stopped, and asked in a whisper whether it was dead, 
and what it was. When I told him it was dead, and that it was 
the evil spirit that had torn open his throat five years ago, and 
for fear of which he had hurriedly closed his door the previous 
night, he put his hands together and attempted to put his head 
on my feet. Next minute there was a call from the road above 
of, 'Sahib, where are you?' It was one of my men calling in 
great agitation, and when I sent an answering call echoing over 
the Ganges, four heads appeared, and catching sight of us four 
men came helter-skelter down the hill, one of them swinging a 
lighted lantern which he had forgotten to extinguish. 

The leopard had got stiff in the hole and was extracted with 
some little difficulty. While it was being tied to the stout 
bamboo pole the men had brought with them, they told me they 
had been unable to sleep that night and that as soon 
as Ibbotson's jemadar's watch showed them it was 4.30 a.m., 
they lit the lantern, and arming themselves with a pole and a 
length of rope had come to look for me, for they felt that I was 
in urgent need of them. Not finding me in the machan and 
seeing the goat unhurt, and the streak of blood on the rock, 
they concluded the man-eater had killed me, and not knowing 
what to do they had in desperation called to me. 

Leaving the pundit to retrieve my rug from the machan, and 
give the pilgrims who were now crowding round his version of 
the night's happenings, the four men and I, with the goat 
trotting alongside, set off for the Inspection Bungalow. The 
goat, who had escaped with very little injury owing to my 
having fired the moment the leopard caught him, little knew 
that his night's adventure was to make him a hero for the rest 
of his life, and that he was to wear a fine brass collar and be a 
source of income to the man from whom I had purchased him. 



and to whom I gave him back. 

Ibbotson was still asleep when I knocked on the glazed door, 
and the moment he caught sight of me he jumped out of bed 
and dashing to the door flung it open, embraced me, and next 
minute was dancing round the leopard which the men had 
deposited on the veranda. Shouting for tea, and a hot bath for 
me, he called for his stenographer and dictated telegrams to 
the Government, the press, and my sister, and a cable to Jean. 
Not one question had he asked, for he knew that the leopard 
which I had brought home at that early hour was the man- 
eater, so what need was there for questions? On that previous 
occasion— in spite of all the evidence that had been produced 
— I had maintained that the leopard killed in the gin-trap was 
not the man-eater, and on this occasion I had said nothing. 

Ibbotson had carried a heavy responsibility since October of 
the previous year, for to him was left the answering of 
questions of Councillors anxious to please their constituents, of 
Government officials who were daily getting more alarmed at 
the mounting death-roll, and of a press that was clamouring for 
results. His position had for a long time been like that of the 
head of a police force who, knowing the identity of a noted 
criminal, was unable to prevent his committing further crimes, 
and for this was being badgered on all sides. Little wonder then 
that Ibbotson on that 2nd of May 1926 was the happiest man I 
had even seen, for not only was he now able to inform all 
concerned that the criminal had been executed, but he was 
also able to tell the people from the bazaars, and from the 
surrounding villages, and the pilgrims, all the whom were 
swarming into the compound of the Inspection Bungalow, that 
the evil spirit that had tormented them for eight long years was 
now dead. 

After emptying a pot of tea and having a hot bath I tried to get 
a little sleep, but fear of a repetition of the cramps that twisted 
my feet, and from which I was only relieved by the vigorous 
ministrations of Ibbotson, brought me out of bed. Then 



Ibbotson and I measured the leopard, and carefully examined 
it. The following are the results of our measurements and of 
our examination. 

MEASUREMENTS 

Length, between pegs 7 feet, 6 inches 
Length, over curves 7 feet, 10 inches 

[Note: these measurements were taken after the leopard had 
been dead twelve hours.] 

DESCRIPTION 

Colour. Light straw. 

Hair: Short and brittle. 

Whiskers: None. 

Teeth: Worn and discoloured, one canine tooth broken. 

Tongue and mouth: Black. 

Wounds: One fresh bullet-wound in right shoulder. 

One old bullet-wound in pad of left hind foot, and part of one 
toe and one claw missing from same foot. 

Several deep and partly-healed cuts on head. 

One deep and partly-healed cut on right hind leg. 

Several partly-healed cuts on tail. 

One partly-healed wound on stifle of left hind leg. 

I am unable to account for the leopard's tongue and mouth 
being black. It was suggested that this might have been caused 
by cyanide, but whether this was so or not I cannot say. Of the 
partly-healed wounds, those on the head, right hind leg, and 
tail were acquired in his fight at Bhainswara, and the one on 
the stifle of his left hind leg was the result of his having been 
caught in the gin-trap, for the piece of skin and tuft of hair we 



found in the trap fitted into this wound. The injuries on the left 
hind foot were the result of the bullet fired on the bridge by the 
young army officer in 1921. When skinning the leopard later, I 
found a pellet of buckshot embedded in the skin of his chest 
which an Indian Christian— years later— claimed he had fired 
at the leopard the year it became a man-eater. 

After Ibbotson and I had measured and examined the leopard it 
was laid in the shade of a tree, and throughout the day 
thousands of men, women, and children came to see it. 

When the people of our hills visit an individual for any 
particular purpose, as for instance to show their gratitude or to 
express their thanks, it is customary for them not to go on their 
mission empty-handed. A rose, a marigold, or a few petals of 
either flower, suffices, and the gift is proffered in hands cupped 
together. When the recipient has touched the gift with the tips 
of the fingers of his right hand, the person proffering the gift 
goes through the motion of pouring the gift on to the 
recipient's feet, in the same manner as if his cupped hands 
contained water. 

I have on other occasions witnessed gratitude, but never as I 
witnessed it that day at Rudraprayag, first at the Inspection 
Bungalow and later at a reception in the bazaar. 

'He killed our only son, sahib, and we being old, our house is 
now desolate.' 

'He ate the mother of my five children, and the youngest is but 
a few months old, and there is none in the home now to care 
for the children, or to cook the food.' 

'My son was taken ill at night and no one dared go to the 
hospital for medicine, and so he died. 1 

Tragedy upon pitiful tragedy, and while I listened, the ground 
around my feet was strewn with flowers. 



Epilogue 

THE EVENTS I HAVE NARRATED TOOK place between 1925 
and 1926. Sixteen years later, in 1942, I was doing a war job in 
Meerut and my sister and I were invited one day by Colonel 
Flye to help entertain wounded men at a garden party The 
men, some fifty or sixty in number, and from all parts of India, 
were sitting round a tennis-court just finishing a sumptuous 
tea, and getting to the smoking stage, when we arrived. Taking 
opposite sides of the court, my sister and I started to go round 
the circle. 

The men were all from the Middle East, and, after a rest, were 
to be sent to their homes, some on leave, and some on 
discharge. 

Music, in the form of a gramophone with Indian records, had 
been provided by Mrs Flye, and as my sister and I had been 
requested to stay until the party gave over— which would be in 
about two hours' time— we had ample time to make our circuit 
of the wounded men. 

I had got about half-way round the circle when I came to a boy 
sitting in a low chair; he had been grievously wounded, and on 
the ground near his chair were two crutches. At my approach 
he very painfully slid off his chair and attempted to put his 
head on my feet. He was woefully light, for he had spent many 
months in hospital, and when I had picked him up and made 
him comfortable in his chair, he said: 'I have been talking with 
your lady sister, and when I told her I was a Garhwali, she told 
me who you were. I was a small boy when you shot the man- 
eater, and as our village is far from Rudraprayag I was not able 
to walk there, and my father not being strong was unable to 
carry me, so I had to stay at home. When my father returned he 
told me he had seen the man-eater, and that with his own eyes 
he had seen the sahib who had shot it. He also told me of the 
sweets that had been distributed that day— his share of which 
he had brought back for me— and of the great crowds he had 
seen. And now, sahib, I will go back to my home with great joy 



in my heart, for I shall be able to tell my father that with my 
own eyes I have seen you and, may be, if I can get anyone to 
carry me to the fair that is held every year at Rudraprayag to 
commemorate the death of the man-eater, I shall tell all the 
people I meet there that I have seen and had speech with you. 1 

A cripple, on the threshold of manhood, returning from the 
wars with a broken body, with no thought of telling of brave 
deeds done, but only eager to tell his father that with his own 
eyes he had seen the man who years ago he had not had the 
opportunity of seeing, a man whose only claim to remembrance 
was that he had fired one accurate shot. 

A typical son of Garhwal, of that simple and hardy hill-folk; and 
of that greater India, whose sons only those few who live 
among them are privileged to know. It is these big-hearted sons 
of the soil, no matter what their caste or creed, who will one 
day weld the contending factions into a composite whole, and 
make of India a great nation. 


-END- 