Introduction 

HAVING read my dedication you may ask: 'Who are these poor 
of India that you mention?' 'What do you mean by "My India"?' 
The questions are justified. The world has developed the habit 
of using the word 'Indian' to denote an inhabitant of the great 
peninsula that stretches upwards of two thousand miles from 
north to south, and as much from east to west. Geographically 
the term may pass muster, but when it comes to applying it to 
the people themselves one should not, without further 
explanation, use a description whose looseness has already led 
to infinite misunderstanding. The four hundred million people 
of India are divided horizontally by race, tribe, and caste into a 
far greater diversity than exists in Europe, and they are cleft 
vertically by religious differences fully as deep as those which 
under any one nation from another. It was religion, not race 
that split the Indian Empire into Hindustan and Pakistan. 

Let me; therefore, explain what I mean by the title of this book. 

'My India', about which these sketches of village life and work 
are written, refers to those portions of a vast land which I have 
known from my earliest days, and where I have worked; and 
the simple folk whose ways and characters I have tried to 
depict for you are those among whom I spent the greater part 
of seventy years. Look at a map of India. Pick out Cape 
Comorin, the most southerly point of the peninsula, and run 
your eye straight up to where the Gangetic Plain slopes up into 
the foothills of the Himalayas in the north of the United 
Provinces. There you will find the hill station of Naini Tal, the 
summer seat of the Government of the United Provinces, 
packed from April to November with Europeans and wealthier 
Indians seeking escape from the heat of the plains, and 
occupied during the winter only by a few permanent residents, 
of whom most of my life I was one. Now leave this hill station 
and run your eye down the Ganges River on its way to the sea, 
past Allahabad, Benares, and Patna, till you reach Mokameh 
Ghat, where I labored for twenty-one years. The scenes of my 



sketches centre round these two points in India: Naini Tal and 
Mokameh Ghat. 

In addition to many footpaths, Naini Tal is accessible by a 
motor road of which we are justly proud, for it has the 
reputation of being the best-aligned and the best-maintained 
hill road in India. Starting at the railway terminus of 
Kathgodam the road, in its course of twenty-two miles, passes 
through forests where occasionally tiger and the dread 
hamadryad are to be seen, and climbs 4,500 feet by easy 
gradients to Naini Tal. Naini Tal can best be described as an 
open valley running east and west, surrounded on three sides 
by hills, the highest of which, Cheena, rises to a height of 8,569 
feet. 

It is open at the end from which the motor road approaches it. 
Nestling in the valley is a lake a little more than two miles in 
circumference, fed at the upper end by a perennial spring and 
overflowing at the other end where the motor road terminates. 
At the upper and lower ends of the valley there are bazaars, 
and the surrounding wooded hills are dotted with residential 
houses, churches, schools, clubs, and hotels. Near the margin 
of the lake are boat houses, a picturesque Hindu temple, and a 
very sacred rock shrine presided over by an old Brahmin priest 
who has been a lifelong friend of mine. 

Geologists differ in their opinion as to the origin of the lake, 
some attributing it to glaciers and landslides, others to volcanic 
action. Hindu legends, however, give the credit for the lake to 
three ancient sages, Atri, Pulastyas and Pulaha. The sacred 
book Skanda-Puran tells how, while on a penitential pilgrimage, 
these three sages arrived at the crest of Cheena and, finding no 
water to quench their thirst, dug a hole at the foot of the hill 
and syphoned water into it from Manasarowar, the sacred lake 
in Tibet, After the departure of the sages the goddess Naini 
arrived and took up her abode in the waters of the lake. In 
course of time forests grew on the sides of the excavation and, 
attracted by the water and the vegetation, birds and animals in 



great numbers made their home in the valley. Within a radius of 
four miles of the goddess's temple I have, in addition to other 
animals, seen tiger, leopard, bear, and sambhar, and in the 
same area identified one hundred and twenty-eight varieties of 
birds. Rumours of the existence of the lake reached the early 
administrators of this part of India, and as the hill people were 
unwilling to disclose the position of their sacred lake, one of 
these administrators, in the year 1839, hit on the ingenious 
plan of placing a large stone on the head of a hill man, telling 
him he would have to carry it until he arrived at goddess 
Naini's lake. After wandering over the hills for many days the 
man eventually got tired of carrying the stone, and led the 
party who were following him to the lake. The stone alleged to 
have been carried by the man was shown to me when I was a 
small boy, and when I marked that it was a very big stone for a 
man to carry— it weighed about six hundred pounds— the hill 
man who showed it to me said, 'Yes, it is a big stone, but you 
must remember that in those days our people were very 
strong'. 

Provide yourself now with a good pair of field glasses and 
accompany me to the top of Cheena. From here you will get a 
bird's-eye view of the country surrounding Naini Tal. The road 
is steep, but if you are interested in birds, trees, and flowers 
you will not mind the three-mile climb and if you arrive at the 
top thirsty, as the three sages did, I will show you a crystal- 
clear spring of coldwater to quench your thirst. Having rested 
and eaten your lunch, turn now to the north. Immediately 
below you is a deep well-wooded valley running down to the 
Kosi River. Beyond the river are a number of parallel ridges 
with villages dotted here and there; on one of these ridges is 
the town of Almora, and on another, the cantonment of 
Ranikhet. Beyond these again are more ridges, the highest of 
which, Dungar Buqual, rises to a height of 14,200 feet and is 
dwarfed into insignificance by the mighty mass of the snow- 
clad Himalayas. 

Sixty miles due north of you, as the crow flies, is Trisul, and to 



the east and to the west of this imposing 23,406-foot peak the 
snow mountains stretch in an unbroken line for many hundreds 
of miles. Where the snows fade out of sight to the west of Trisul 
are first the Gangotri group, then the glaciers and mountains 
above the sacred shrines of Kedarnath and Badrinath, and then 
Kamet made famous by Smythe. 

To the east of Trisul, and set farther back, you can just see the 
top of Nanda Devi (25,689 feet), the highest mountain in India. 
To your right front is Nanda Kot, the spotless pillow of the 
goddess Parvati, and a little farther east are the beautiful peaks 
of Panch Chuli, the 'five cooking-places' used by the Pan-davas 
while on their way to Kailas in Tibet. At the first approach of 
dawn, while Cheena and the intervening hills are still shrouded 
in the mantle of night, the snowy range changes from indigo 
blue to rose pink, and as the sun touches the peaks nearest to 
heaven the pink gradually changes to dazzling white. During 
the day the mountains show up cold and white, each crest 
trailing a feather of powdered snow, and in the setting sun the 
scene may be painted pink, gold, or red according to the fancy 
of heaven's artist. 

Turn your back now on the snows and face south. At the limit of 
your range of vision you will see three cities: Bareilly, Kashipur, 
and Moradabad. These three cities, the nearest of which, 
Kashipur, is some fifty miles as the crow flies, are on the main 
railway that runs between Calcutta and the Punjab. There are 
three belts of country between the railway and the foothills: 
first a cultivated belt some twenty miles wide, then a grass belt 
ten miles wide known as the Terai, and third a tree belt ten 
miles wide known as the Bhabar. In the Bhabar belt, which 
extends right up to the foothills, clearings have been made, and 
on this rich fertile soil, watered by many streams, villages of 
varying size have been established. The nearest group of 
villages, Kaladhungi, is fifteen miles from Naini Tal by road, 
and at the upper end of this group you will see our village, 

Choti Haldwani, surrounded by a three-mile-long stone wall. 
Only the roof of our cottage, which is at the junction of the road 



running down from Naini Tal with the road skirting the 
foothills, is visible in a group of big trees. The foothills in this 
area are composed almost entirely of iron ore, and it was at 
Kaladhungi that iron was first smelted in northern India. The 
fuel used was wood, and as the King of Kumaon, General Sir 
Henry Ramsay, feared that the furnaces would consume all the 
forests in the Bhabar, he closed down the: foundries. Between 
Kaladhungi and your seat on Cheena the low hills are densely 
wooded with sal, the trees which supply our railways with ties, 
or sleepers, and in the nearest fold of the ridge nestles the 
little lake of Khurpa Tal, surrounded by fields on which the best 
potatoes in India are grown. 

Away in the distance, to the right, you can see the sun glinting 
on the Ganges, and to the left you can see it glinting on the 
Sarda; the distance between these two rivers where they leave 
the foot hills is roughly two hundred miles. 

Now turn to the east and before you in the near and middle 
distance you will see the country described in old gazetteers as 
'the district of sixty lakes'. Many of these takes have silted up, 
some in my lifetime and the only ones of any size that now 
remain are Naini Tal, Sat Tal, Bhim Tal, and Nakuchia Tal. 
Beyond Nakuchia Tal is the cone-shaped hill, Choti Kailas. The 
gods do not favour the killing of bird or beast on this sacred 
hill, and the last man who disregarded their wishes— a soldier 
on leave during the war— unaccountably lost his footing after 
killing a mountain goat and, in full view of his two companions, 
fell a thousand feet into the valley below. 

Beyond Choti Kailas is the Kala Agar ridge on which I hunted 
the Chowgarh man-eating tiger for two years, and beyond this 
ridge the mountains of Nepal fade out of sight. Turn now to the 
west. But first it will be necessary for you to descend a few 
hundred feet and take up a new position on Deopatta, a rocky 
peak 7,991 feet high adjoining Cheena. Immediately below you 
is a deep, wide, and densely wooded valley which starts on the 
saddle between Cheena and Deopatta and extends through 



Dachouri to Kaladhungi. It is richer in flora and fauna than any 
other in the Himalayas, and beyond this beautiful valley the 
hills extend in an unbroken line up to the Ganges, the waters of 
which you can see glinting m the sun over a hundred miles 
away On the far side of the Ganges are the Siwalik range of 
hills— hills that were old before the mighty Himalayas were 
born. 



I - The Queen of the Village 

COME with me now to one of the villages you saw in your 
bird's-eye view from the top of Cheena. The parallel lines you 
saw etched across the face of the hill are terraced fields. Some 
of these are no more than ten feet wide, and the stone walls 
supporting them are in some cases thirty feet high. The 
ploughing of these narrow fields, with a steep hill on one side 
and a big drop on the other, is a difficult and a dangerous job, 
and is only made possible by the use of a plough with a short 
shaft and of cattle that have been bred on the hills and that are 
in consequence small and stocky, and as sure-footed as goats. 
The stout hearted people, who with infinite labour have made 
these terraced fields, live in a row of stone houses with slate 
roofs bordering the rough and narrow road that runs from the 
Bhabar, and the plains beyond, to the inner Himalayas. The 
people in this village know me, for in response to an urgent 
telegram, which the whole village subscribed to send me, and 
which was carried by runner to Naini Tal for transmission, I 
once came hot-foot from Mokameh Ghat, where I was working, 
to rid them of a man-eating tiger. 

The incident which necessitated the sending of the telegram 
took place at mid day in a field just above the row of houses. A 
woman and her twelve-year-old daughter were reaping wheat 
when a tiger suddenly appeared. As the girl attempted to run 
to her mother for protection the tiger struck at her, severed her 
head from her body, and catching the body in mid-air bounded 
away into the jungle adjoining the field, leaving the head near 
the mother's feet. Telegrams, even urgent ones, take long in 
transmission, and as I had to do a journey of a thousand miles 
by rail and road, and the last twenty miles on foot, a week 
elapsed between the sending of the telegram and my arrival at 
the village; and in the meantime the tiger made another kill. 

The victim on this occasion was a woman who, with her 
husband and children, had lived for years in the compound of 
the house adjoining our home in Naini Tal. This woman, in 



company with several others, was cutting grass on the hill 
above the village when she was attacked by the tiger, killed, 
and carried off in full view of her companions. The screams of 
the frightened women were heard in the village, and, while the 
women were running back to Naini Tal to report the tragedy, 
the men of the village assembled and with great gallantry 
drove away the tiger. Knowing— with an Indian's trust— that I 
would respond to the telegram they had sent me, they wrapped 
the body in a blanket and tied it to the topmost branch of a 
thirty-foot rhododendron tree. From the tiger's subsequent 
actions it was evident that he had been lying up close by and 
had watched these proceedings, for if he had not seen the body 
being put up in a tree he would never have found it, as tigers 
have no sense of smell. 

When the women made their report in Naini Tal the husband of 
the dead woman came to my sister Maggie and told her of the 
killing of his wife, and at crack of dawn next morning Maggie 
sent out some of our men to make a machan over the kill and to 
sit on the machan until I came, for I was expected to arrive that 
day. Materials for making the machan were procured at the 
village and, accompanied by the villagers, my men proceeded 
to the rhododendron tree, where it was found that the tiger had 
climbed the tree, torn a hole in the blanket, and carried away 
the body. Again with commendable courage— for they were 
unarmed— the villagers and my men followed up the drag for 
half a mile; and on finding the partly eaten body they started to 
put up a machan in an oak tree immediately above it. Just as 
the machan was completed, a sportsman from Naini Tal, who 
was out on an all-day shoot, arrived quite by accident at the 
spot and, saying he was a friend of mine, he told my men to go 
away, as he would sit up for the tiger himself. So, while my men 
returned to Naini Tal to make their report to me— for I had 
arrived in the meantime— the sportsman, his gun bearer, and a 
man carrying his lunch basket and a lantern, took up their 
positions on the machan. 

There was no moon, and an hour after dark the gun-bearer 



asked the sportsman why he had allowed the tiger to carry 
away the kill, without firing at it. Refusing to believe that the 
tiger had been anywhere near the kill, the sportsman lit the 
lantern; and as he was letting it down on a length of string, to 
illuminate the ground, the string slipped through his fingers 
and the lantern crashed to the ground and caught fire. It was 
the month of May, when our forests are very dry, and with in a 
minute the dead grass and brushwood at the foot of the tree 
were burning fiercely. With great courage the sportsman 
shinned down the tree and attempted to beat out the flames 
with his tweed coat, until he suddenly remembered the man- 
eater and hurriedly climbed back to the machan. He left his 
coat, which was on fire, behind him. 

The illumination from the fire revealed the fact that the Kill 
was indeed gone, but the sportsman at this stage had lost all 
interest in kills and his anxiety now was for his own safety, and 
for the damage the fire would do to the Government forest. 
Fanned by a strong wind the fire receded from the vicinity of 
the tree and eight hours later a heavy downpour of rain and 
hail extinguished it, but not before it had burnt out several 
square miles of forest. It was the sportsman's first attempt to 
make contact with a man-eater and, after his experience of first 
nearly having been roasted and later having been frozen, it was 
also his last. Next morning, while he was making his weary way 
back to Naini Tal by one road, I was on my way out to the 
village by another, in ignorance of what had happened the 
previous night. 

At my request the villagers took me to the rhododendron tree 
and I was amazed to see how determined the tiger had been to 
regain possession of his kill. The torn blanket was some twenty- 
five feet from the ground, and the claw marks on the tree, the 
condition of the soft ground, and the broken brushwood at the 
foot of it, showed that the tiger had climbed and fallen off the 
tree at least twenty times before he eventually succeeded in 
tearing a hole in die blanket and removing the body. 



From this spot the tiger had carried the body half a mile, to the 
tree on which the machan had been built. Beyond this point the 
fire had obliterated all trace of a drag but, following on the line 
I thought the tiger would have taken, a mile farther on I 
stumbled on the charred head of the woman. A hundred yards 
beyond this spot there was heavy cover which the fire had not 
reached and for hours I searched this cover, right down to the 
foot of the valley five miles away, without, however, finding any 
trace of the tiger. 

(Five people lost their lives between the accidental arrivals of 
the sportsman at the machan, and the shooting of the tiger.) I 
arrived back in the village, after my fruitless search of the 
cover, late in the evening, and the wife of the headman 
prepared for me a meal which her daughters placed before me 
on brass plates. After a very generous, and a very welcome 
meal— for I had eaten nothing that day— I picked up the plates 
with the intention of washing them in a nearby spring. Seeing 
my intention the three girls ran forward and relieved me of the 
plates, saying, with a toss of their heads and a laugh, which it 
would not break their caste— they were Brahmins— to wash 
the plates from which the White Sadhu had eaten. 

The headman is dead now and his daughters have married and 
left the village, but his wife is alive, and you, who are 
accompanying me to the village, after your bird's-eye view from 
Cheena, must be prepared to drink the tea, not made with 
water but with rich fresh milk sweetened with jaggery, which 
she will brew for us. Our approach down the steep hillside 
facing the village has been observed and a small square of 
frayed carpet and two wicker chairs, reinforced with ghooral 
skins, have been set ready for us. Standing near these chairs to 
welcome us is the wife of the headman; there is no purdah here 
and she will not be embarrassed if you take a good look at her, 
and she is worth looking at. Her hair, snow-white now, was 
raven-black when I first knew her, and her cheeks, which in 
those far-off days had a bloom on them, are now ivory-white, 
without a single crease or wrinkle. Daughter of a hundred 



generations of Brahmins, her blood is as pure as that of the 
ancestor who founded her line. 

Pride of pure ancestry is inherent in all men, but nowhere is 
there greater respect for pure ancestry than there is in India. 
There are several different castes of people in the village this 
dear old lady administers, but her rule is never questioned and 
her word is law, not because of the strong arm of retainers, for 
of these she has none, but because she is a Brahmin, the salt of 
India's earth. 

The high prices paid in recent years for field produce have 
brought prosperity— as it is known in India— to this hill village, 
and of this prosperity our hostess has had her full share The 
string of fluted gold beads that she brought as part of her 
dowry are still round her neck, but the thin silver necklace has 
been deposited in the family bank, the hole in the ground under 
the cooking-place, and her neck is now encircled by a solid gold 
band. In the far-off days her ears were unadorned, but now she 
has number of thin gold rings in the upper cartilage, and from 
her nose hangs a gold ring five inches in diameter, the weight 
of which is partly carried by a thin gold chain looped over her 
right ear. Her dress is the same as that worn by all high-caste 
hill women: a shawl, a tight-fitting bodice of warm material, 
and a voluminous sprint skirt. Her feet are bare, for even in 
these advanced days the wearing of shoes among our hill folk 
denotes that the wearer is unchaste. 

The old lady has now retired to the inner recesses of her house 
to prepare tea, and while she is engaged on this pleasant task 
you can turn your attention to the bania's shop on the other 
side of the narrow road. The bania, too, is an old friend. Having 
greeted us and presented us with a packet of cigarettes he has 
gone back to squat cross-legged on the wooden platform on 
which his wares are exposed. These wares consist of the few 
articles that the village folk and wayfarers need in the way of 
atta, rice, dal, ghee, salt, stale sweets purchased at a discount 
in the Naini Tal bazaar, hill potatoes fit for the table of a king. 



enormous turnips so fierce that when eaten in public they make 
the onlookers' eyes water, cigarettes and matches, a tin of 
kerosene oil, and near the platform and within reach of his 
hand an iron pan in which milk is kept simmering throughout 
the day 

As the bania takes his seat on the platform his few customers 
gather in front of him. First is a small boy, accompanied by an 
even smaller sister, who is the proud possessor of one pice, all 
of which he is anxious to invest in sweets. Taking the pice from 
the small grubby hand the bania drops it into an open box. 

Then, waving his hand over the tray to drive away the wasps 
and flies, he picks up a square sweet made of sugar and curds, 
breaks it in half and puts a piece into each eager outstretched 
hand. 

Next comes a woman of the depressed class who has two annas 
to spend on her shopping. One anna is invested in atta, the 
coarse ground wheat that is the staple food of our hill folk, and 
two pice in the coarsest of the three qualities of dal exposed on 
the stall. With the remaining two pice she purchases a little salt 
and one of the fierce turnips and then, with a respectful salaam 
to the bania, for he is a man who commands respect, she 
hurries off to prepare the midday meal for her family. 

While the woman is being served the shrill whistles and shouts 
of men herald the approach of a string of pack mules, carrying 
cloth from the Moradabad hand looms to the markets in the 
interior of the hills. The sweating mules have had a stiff climb 
up the rough road from the foothills. A pice is worth about a 
farthing, but is itself made up of three smaller coins called pies. 
Four pice make an anna, sixteen annas a rupee and while they 
are having a breather the four men in charge have sat down on 
the bench provided by the bania for his customers and are 
treating themselves to a cigarette and a glass of milk. Milk is 
the strongest drink that has ever been served at this shop, or at 
any other of the hundreds of wayside shops throughout the 
hills, for, except for those few who have come in contact with 



what is called civilization, our hill men do not drink. 


Drinking among women, in my India, is unknown. No daily 
paper has ever found its way into this village, and the only 
news the inhabitants get of the outside world is from an 
occasional trip into Naini Tal and from wayfarers, the best- 
informed of whom are the packmen. On their way into the hills 
they bring news of the distant plains of India, and on their 
return journey a month or so later they have news from the 
trading centers where they sell their wares. 

The tea the old lady has prepared for us is now ready. You must 
be careful how you handle the metal cup filled to the brim, for 
it is hot enough to take the skin off your hands. Interest has 
now shifted from the packmen to us, and whether or not you 
like the sweet, hot liquid you must drink every drop of it, for 
the eyes of the entire village, whose guest you are, are on you; 
and to leave any dregs in your cup would mean that you did not 
consider the drink good enough for you. 

Others have attempted to offer recompense for hospitality but 
we will not make this mistake, for these simple and hospitable 
people are intensely proud, and it would be as great an insult 
to offer to pay the dear old lady for her cup of tea as it would 
have been to have offered to pay the bania for his packet of 
cigarettes. So, as we leave this village, which is only one of the 
many thousands of similar villages scattered over the vast area 
viewed through your good field glasses from the top of Cheena, 
where I have spent the best part of my life, you can be assured 
that the welcome we received on arrival, and the invitation to 
return soon, are genuine expressions of the affection and 
goodwill of the people in my India for all who know and 
understand them. 



II - Kunwar Singh 

KUNWAR SINGH was by caste a Thakur, and the headman of 
Chandni Chauk village. Whether, he was a good or a bad 
headman I do not know. What endeared him to me was the fact 
that he was the best and the most successful poacher in 
Kaladhungi, and a devoted admirer of my eldest brother Tom, 
my boyhood's hero. 

Kunwar Singh had many tales to tell of Tom, for he had 
accompanied him on many of his shikar expeditions, and the 
tale I like best, and that never lost anything in repetition, 
concerned an impromptus competition between brother Tom 
and a man by the name of Ellis, whom Tom had beaten by one 
point the previous year to win the B.RR.A. gold medal for the 
best rifle-shot in India. 

Tom and Ellis, unknown to each other, were shooting in the 
same jungle near Garuppu, and early one morning, when the 
mist was just rising above the tree tops, they met on the 
approach to some high ground overlooking a wide depression 
in which, at that hour of the morning, deer and pig were always 
to be found. Tom was accompanied by Kunwar Singh, while 
Ellis was accompanied by a shikari from NainiTal named 
Budhoo, whom Kunwar Singh despised because of his low caste 
and his ignorance of all matters connected with the jungles. 

After the usual greetings, Ellis said that, though Tom had 
beaten him by one miserable point on the rifle range, he would 
show Tom that he was a better game shot; and he suggested 
that they should each fire two shots to prove the point. Lots 
were drawn and Ellis, winning, decided to fire first. A careful 
approach was then made to the low ground, Ellis carrying the 
-450 Martini-Henry rifle with which he had competed at the 
B.RR.A. meeting, while Tom carried a -400 D.B. express by 
Westley-Richards of which he was justly proud, for few of these 
weapon shad up to that date arrived in India. The wind may 
have been wrong, or the approach careless. Anyway, when the 
competitors topped the high ground, no animals were in sight 



on the low ground. 

On the near side of the low ground there was a strip of dry 
grass beyond which the grass had been burnt, and it was on 
this burnt ground, now turning green with sprouting new 
shoots, that animals were to be seen both morning and 
evening. Kunwar Singh was of the opinion that some animals 
might be lurking in the strip of dry grass, and at his suggestion 
he and Budhoo set fire to it. 

When the grass was well alight and the drongos, rollers, and 
starlings were collecting from the four corners of the heavens 
to feed on the swarms of grasshoppers that were taking flight 
to escape from the flames, a movement was observed at the 
farther edge of the grass, and presently two big boar came out 
and went streaking across the burnt ground for the shelter of 
the tree jungle three hundred yards away. Very deliberately 
Ellis, who weighed fourteen stone, knelt down, raised his rifle 
and sent a bullet after the hindmost pig, kicking up the dust 
between its hind legs. Lowering his rifle, Ellis adjusted the 
back sight to two hundred yards, ejected the spent cartridge, 
and rammed a fresh one into the breach. His second bullet sent 
up a cloud of dust immediately in front of the leading pig. This 
second bullet deflected the pigs to the right, bringing them 
broadside onto the guns, and making them increase their 
speed. 

It was now Tom's turn to shoot, and to shoot in a hurry, for the 
pigs were fast approaching the tree jungle, and getting out of 
range. Standing four-square, Tom raised his rifle and, as the 
two shots rang out the pigs, both shot through the head, went 
over like rabbits. Kunwar Singh's recital of this event invariably 
ended up with: 'And then I turned to Budhoo, that city-bred son 
of a low-caste man, the smell of whose oiled hair offended me, 
and said, "Did you see that, you, who boasted that your sahib 
would teach mine how to shoot? Had my sahib wanted to 
blacken the face of yours he would not have used two bullets, 
but would have killed both pigs with one". 1 



Just how this feat could have been accomplished, Kunwar Singh 
never told me, and I never asked, for my faith in my hero was 
so great that I never for one moment doubted that, if he had 
wished, he could have killed both pigs with one bullet. Kunwar 
Singh was the first to visit me that day of days when I was 
given my first gun. He came early, and as with great pride I put 
the old double-barrelled muzzle-loader into his hands he never, 
even by the flicker of an eyelid, showed that he had seen the 
gaping split in the right barrel, or the lappings of brass wire 
that held the stock and the barrels together. Only the good 
qualities of the left barrel were commented on, and extolled; its 
length, thickness, and the years of service it would give. And 
then, laying the gun aside, he turned to me and gladdened my 
eight-year-old heart and made me doubly proud of my 
possession by saying: 'You are now no longer a boy, but a man; 
and with this good gun you can go anywhere you like in our 
jungles and never be afraid, provided you learn how to climb 
trees. 

And I will now tell you a story to show how necessary it is for 
us men who shoot in the jungles to know how to do so. 'Har 
Singh and I went out to shoot one day last April, and all would 
have been well if a fox had not crossed our path as we were 
leaving the village. Har Singh, as you know, is a poor shikari 
with little knowledge of the jungle folk, and when, after seeing 
the fox, I suggested we should turn round and go home he 
laughed at me and said it was child's talk to say that a fox 
would bring us bad luck. So we continued on our way. We had 
started when the stars were paling, and near Garuppu I fired at 
a chital stag and unaccountably missed it. Later Har Singh 
broke the wing of a pea fowl, but though we chased the 
wounded bird as hard as we could it got away in the long grass, 
where we lost it. Thereafter, though we combed the jungles we 
saw nothing to shoot, and towards the evening we turned our 
faces towards home. 

'Having fired two shots, and being afraid that the forest guards 
would be looking for us, we avoided the road and took a sandy 



nullah that ran through dense scrub and thorn-bamboo jungle. 
As we went along talking of our bad luck, suddenly a tiger 
came out into the nullah and stood looking at us. For a long 
minute the tiger stared and then it turned and went back the 
way it had come. 'After waiting a suitable time we continued on 
our way when the tiger again came out into the nullah; and 
this time, as it stood and looked at us, it was growling and 
twitching its tail. We again stood quite still, and after a time the 
tiger quietened down and left the nullah. A little later a number 
of jungle fowl rose cackling out of the dense scrub, evidently 
disturbed by the tiger, and one of them came and sat on a 
haldu tree right in front of us. As the bird alighted on a branch 
in full view of us, Har Singh said he would shoot it and so avoid 
going home empty handed. He added that the shot would 
frighten away the tiger, and before I could stop him he fired. 

'Next second there was a terrifying roar as the tiger came 
crashing through the brushwood towards us. At this spot there 
were some runi trees growing on the edge of the nullah, and I 
dashed towards one while Har Singh dashed towards another. 
My tree was the nearer to the tiger, but before it arrived I had 
climbed out of reach. Har Singh had not learnt to climb trees 
when a boy, as I had and he was still standing on the ground, 
reaching up and trying to grasp a branch, when the tiger, after 
leaving me, sprang at him. 

The tiger did not bite or scratch Har Singh, but standing on its 
hind legs it clasped the tree, pinning Har Singh against it, and 
then started to claw big bits of bark and wood off the far side of 
the tree. While it was so engaged, Har Singh was screaming 
and the tiger was roaring. I had taken my gun up into the tree 
with me, so now, holding on with my bare feet, I cocked the 
hammer and fired the gun off into the air. On hearing the shot 
so close to it the tiger bounded away, and Har Singh collapsed 
at the foot of the tree.' 


When the tiger had been gone some time, I climbed down very 
silently, and went to Har Singh. I found that one of the tiger's 



claws had entered his stomach and torn the lining from near 
his navel to within a few fingers' breadth of the backbone, and 
that all his inside had fallen out. Here was great trouble for me. 
I could not run away and leave Har Singh, and not having any 
experience in these matters, I did not know whether it would 
be best to try and put all that mass of inside back into Har 
Singh's stomach, or cut it off. I talked in whispers on this 
matter with Har Singh, for we were afraid that if the tiger 
heard us it would return and kill us, and Har Singh was of the 
opinion that his inside should be put back into his stomach. 

So, while he lay on his back on the ground, I stuffed it all back, 
including the dry leaves and grass and bits of sticks that were 
sticking to it. I then wound my pugree round him, knotting it 
tight to keep everything from falling out again, and we set out 
on the seven-mile walk to our village, myself in front, carrying 
the two guns, while Har Singh walked behind. 'We had to go 
slowly, for Har Singh was holding the pugree in position, and 
on the way night came on and Har Singh said he thought it 
would be better to go to the hospital at Kaladhungi than to our 
village; so I hid the guns, and we went the extra three miles to 
the hospital. 

The hospital was closed when we arrived, but the doctor babu 
who lives near by was awake, and when he heard our story he 
sent me to call Aladia the tobacco seller, who is also postmaster 
at Kaladhungi and who receives five rupees pay per month 
from Government, while he lit a lantern and went to the 
hospital hut with Har Singh. When I returned with Aladia, the 
doctor had laid Har Singh on a string bed and, while Aladia 
held the lantern and I held the two pieces of flesh together, the 
doctor sewed up the hole in Har Singh's stomach. Thereafter 
the doctor, who is a very kind man of raw years and who 
refused to take the two rupees I offered him, gave Har Singh a 
drink of very good medicine to make him forget the pain in his 
stomach and we went home and found our women folk crying, 
for they thought we had been killed in the jungle by dacoits, or 
by wild animals. So you see. Sahib, how necessary it is for us 



men who shoot in the jungles to know how to climb trees, for if 
Har Singh had had someone to advise him when he was a boy, 
he would not have brought all that trouble on us. 

I learnt many things from Kunwar Singh during the first few 
years that I carried the old muzzle-loader, one of them being 
the making of mental maps. The jungles we hunted in, 
sometimes together, but more often alone— for Kunwar Singh 
had a horror of dacoits and there were times when for weeks 
on end he would not leave his village— were many hundreds of 
miles square with only one road running through them. Times 
without number when returning from a shoot I called in at 
Kunwar Singh's village, which was three miles nearer the 
forest than my house was, to tell him I had shot a chital or 
sambhar stag, or maybe a big pig, and to ask him to retrieve 
the bag. 

He never once failed to do so, no matter in how great a 
wilderness of tree or scrub or grass jungle I had carefully 
hidden the animal I had shot, to protect it from vultures. We 
had a name for every outstanding tree, and for every water 
hole, game track, and nullah. All our distances were measured 
by imaginary flight of a bullet fired from a muzzle-loader, and 
all our directions fixed by' The runi tree against which the 
tigress— who evidently had just given birth to cubs in that 
area, and who resented the presence of human beings— pinned 
Har Singh, was about eighteen inches thick, and in her rage 
the tigress tore away a third of it. 

This tree became a landmark for all who shot or poached in the 
Garuppu jungles until, some twenty-five years later; it was 
destroyed by a forest fire. Har Singh, in spite of the rough and 
ready treatment he received at the hands of his three friends, 
and in spite of the vegetation that went inside him, suffered no 
ill effects from his wound, and lived to die of old age. The four 
points of the compass. When I had hidden an animal, or 
Kunwar Singh had seen vultures collected on a tree and 
suspected that a leopard or a tiger had made a kill, either he or 



I would set out with absolute, confidence that we would find 
the spot indicated, no matter what time of day or night it might 
be. 

After I left school and started work in Bengal I was only able to 
visit Kaladhungi for about three weeks each year, and I was 
greatly distressed to find on one of these annual visits that my 
old friend Kunwar Singh had fallen a victim to the curse of our 
foothills, opium. With a constitution weakened by malaria the 
pernicious habit grew on him, and though he made me many 
promises he had not the moral strength to keep them. I was 
therefore not surprised, on my visit to Kaladhungi one 
February; to be told by the men in our village that Kunwar 
Singh was very seriously ill. News of my arrival spread through 
Kaladhungi that night, and next day Kunwar Singh's youngest 
son, a lad of eighteen, came hot-foot to tell me that his father 
was at death's door, and that he wished to see me before he 
died. 

As headman of Chandni Chauk, paying Government land 
revenue of four thousand rupees, Kunwar Singh was an 
important person, and lived in a big stone-built house with a 
slate roof in which I had often enjoyed his hospitality. Now as I 
approached the village in company with his son, I heard the 
wailing of women coming, not from the house, but from a small 
one-roomed hut Kunwar Singh had built for one of his servants. 
As the son led me towards the hut, he said his father had been 
moved to it because the grandchildren disturbed his sleep. 
Seeing us coming, Kunwar Singh's eldest son stepped out of 
the hut and informed me that his father was unconscious, and 
that he only had a few minutes to live. I stopped at the door of 
the hut, and when my eyes had got accustomed to the dim 
light, made dimmer by a thick pall of smoke which filled the 
room, I saw Kunwar Singh lying on the bare mud floor, naked, 
and partly covered with a sheet. His nerveless right arm was 
supported by an old man sitting on the floor near him, and his 
fingers were being held round the tail of a cow. (This custom of 
a dying man being made to hold the tail of a cow— preferably 



that of a black heifer— has its origin in the Hindu belief that 
when the spirit leaves its earthly body it is confronted with a 
river of blood, on the far side of which sits the Judge before 
whom the spirit must appear to answer for its sins. The heifer's 
tail is the only way by which the departing spirit can cross the 
river, and if the spirit is not provided with means of transit it is 
condemned to remain on earth, to be a torment to those who 
failed to enable it to appear before the judgment seat.) 

Near Kunwar Singh's head was a brazier with cow-dung cakes 
burning on it, and by the brazier a priest was sitting, intoning 
prayers and ringing a bell. Every available inch of floor space 
was packed with men, and with women who were wailing and 
repeating over and over again, 'He has gone! He has gone!' I 
knew men died like this in India every day, but I was not going 
to let my friend be one of them. In fact, if I could help it he 
would not die at all, and anyway not at present. Striding into 
the room, I picked up the iron brazier, which was hotter than I 
expected it to be, and burnt my hands. This I carried to the 
door and flung outside. Returning, I cut the bark rope by which 
the cow was tethered to a peg driven into the mud floor, and 
led it outside. 

As these acts, which I had performed in silence, became 
evident to the people assembled in the room, the hubbub began 
to die down, and it ceased altogether when I took the priest's 
arm and conducted him from the room. Then, standing at the 
door, I ordered everyone to go outside; the order was obeyed 
without a murmur or a single protest. The number of people, 
both old and young, who emerged from the hut, was incredible. 
When the last of them had crossed the doorstep, I told Kunwar 
Singh's eldest son to warm two seers of fresh milk and to bring 
it to me with as little delay as possible. The man looked at me 
in blank surprise, but when I repeated the order he hurried off 
to execute it. I now re-entered the hut, pulled forward a string 
bed which had been pushed against the wall, picked Kunwar 
Singh up and laid him on it. 



Fresh air, and plenty of it, was urgently needed, and as I looked 
round I saw a small window which had been boarded up. It did 
not take long to tear down the boards and let a stream of clean 
sweet air blow directly from the jungles into the overheated 
room which reeked with the smell of human beings, cow dung, 
burnt ghee, and acrid smoke. When I picked up Kunwar Singh's 
wasted frame, I knew there was a little life in it, but only a very 
little. His eyes, which were sunk deep into his head, were 
closed, his lips were blue, and his breath was coming in short 
gasps. 

Soon, however, the fresh, clean air began to revive him and his 
breathing became less laboured and more regular, and 
presently, as I sat on his bed and watched through the door the 
commotion that was taking place among the mourners whom I 
had ejected from the death-chamber, I became aware that he 
had opened his eyes and was looking at me; and without 
turning my head, I began to speak. 'Times have changed, uncle, 
and you with them. There was a day when no man would have 
dared to remove you from your own house, and lay you on the 
ground in a servant's hut to die like an outcaste and a beggar. 
You would not listen to my words of warning and now the 
accursed drug has brought you to this. Had I delayed but a few 
minutes in answering your summons this day, you know you 
would by now have been on your way to the burning-ghat. As 
headman of Chandni Chauk and the best shikari in Kaladhungi, 
all men respected you. But now you have lost that respect, and 
you who were strong, and who ate of the best, are weak and 
empty of stomach, for as we came your son told me nothing has 
passed your lips for sixteen days. But you are not going to die, 
old friend, as they told you were. You will live for many more 
years, and though we may never shoot together again in the 
Garuppu jungles, you will not want for game, for I will share all 
I shoot with you, as I have always done. 'And now, here in this 
hut, with the sacred thread round your fingers and a pipal leaf 
in your hands, you must swear an oath on your eldest son's 
head that never again will you touch the foul drug. And this 



time you will and you shall keep your oath. And now, while we 
wait for the milk your son is bringing, we will smoke . 1 

Kunwar Singh had not taken his eyes off me while I was 
speaking and now for the first time he opened his lips and said, 
'How can a man who is dying smoke ? 1 'On the subject of dying', 
I said, 'we will say no more, for as I have just told you, you are 
not going to die. And as to how we will smoke, I will show you.' 
Then, taking two cigarettes from my case, I lit one and placed 
it between his lips. Slowly he took a pull at it, coughed, and 
with a very feeble hand removed the cigarette. But when the fit 
of coughing was over, he replaced it between his lips and 
continued to draw on it. Before we had finished our smoke, 
Kunwar Singh's son returned carrying a big brass vessel, which 
he would have dropped at the door if I had not hurriedly 
relieved him of it. His surprise was understandable, for the 
father whom he had last seen lying on the ground dying, was 
now lying on the bed, his head resting on my hat, smoking. 
There was nothing in the hut to drink from, so I sent the son 
back to the house for a cup; and when he had brought it I gave 
Kunwar Singh a drink of warm milk. 

I stayed in the hut till late into the night, and when I left 
Kunwar Singh had drunk a seer of milk and was sleeping 
peacefully on a warm and comfortable bed. Before I left I 
warned the son that he was on no account to allow anyone to 
come near the hut; that he was to sit by his father and give him 
a drink of milk every time he awoke; and that if on my return in 
the morning I found Kunwar Singh dead, I would burn down 
the village. The sun was just rising next morning when I 
returned to Chandni Chauk to find both Kunwar Singh and his 
son fast asleep and the brass vessel empty. Kunwar Singh kept 
his oath, and though he never regained sufficient strength to 
accompany me on my shikar expeditions, he visited me often 
and died peacefully four years later in his own house and on his 
own bed. 



Ill - Mothi 

MOTHI had the delicate, finely chiselled features that are the 
heritage of all high-caste people in India, but he was only a 
young stripling, all arms and legs, when his father and mother 
died and left him with the responsibilities of the family 
Fortunately it was a small one, consisting only of his younger 
brother and sister. Mothi was at that time fourteen years of 
age, and had been married for six years. One of his first acts on 
finding himself unexpectedly the head of the family was to 
fetch his twelve-year-old wife— whom he had not seen since 
the day of their wedding— from her father's house in the Kota 
Dun, some dozen miles from Kaladhungi. As the cultivation of 
the six acres of land Mothi inherited entailed more work than 
the four young people could tackle, Mothi took on a partner, 
locally known as Agee, who in return for his day-and-night 
services received free board and lodging and half of the crops 
produced. The building of the communal hut with bamboos and 
grass procured from the jungles, under permit, and carried 
long distances on shoulder and on head, and the constant 
repairs to the hut necessitated by the violent storms that sweep 
the foothills, threw a heavy burden on Mothi and his helpers, 
and to relieve them of this burden I built them a masonry 
house, with three rooms and a wide veranda, on a four-foot 
plinth. For, with the exception of Mothi's wife who had come 
from a higher altitude, all of them were steeped in malaria. 

To protect their crops the tenants used to erect a thorn fence 
round the entire village, but though it entailed weeks of hard 
labour, this flimsy fence afforded little protection against stray 
cattle and wild animals, and when the crops were on the 
ground the tenants, or members of their families, had to keep 
watch in the fields all night. Firearms were strictly rationed, 
and for our forty tenants the Government allowed us one 
single-barrelled muzzle-loading gun. This gun enables one 
tenant in turn to protect his crops with a lethal weapon, while 
the others had to rely on tin cans which they beat throughout 
the night. Though the gun accounted for a certain number of 



pigs and porcupines, which were the worst offenders, the 
nightly damage was considerable, for the village was isolated 
and surrounded by forests. So, when my handling contract at 
Mokameh Ghat began paying a dividend, I started building a 
masonry wall round the village. When completed the wall was 
six feet high and three miles long. It took ten years to build, for 
my share of the dividends was small. If today you motor from 
Haldwani to Ramnagar, through Kaladhungi, you will skirt the 
upper end of the wall before you cross the Boar Bridge and 
enter the forest. 

I was walking through the village one cold December morning, 
with Robin, my dog, running ahead and putting up covey after 
covey of grey partridge which no one but Robin ever disturbed 
— for all who lived in the village loved to hear them calling at 
sunrise and at sunset— when in the soft ground at the edge of 
one of the irrigation channels I saw the tracks of a pig. This 
pig, with great, curved, wicked-looking tusks, was as big as a 
buffalo calf and was known to everyone in the village. As a 
squeaker he had wormed his way through the thorn fence and 
fattened on the crops the wall had worried him at first, but it 
had a rough face and, being a determined pig, he had in time 
learnt to climb it. Time and time again the watchers in the 
fields had fired at him and on several occasions he had left a 
blood trail, but none of his wounds had proved fatal and the 
only effect they had had on him was to make him more wary. 

On this December morning the pig's tracks led me towards 
Mothi's holding, and as I approached the house I saw Mothi's 
wife standing in front of it, her hands on her hips, surveying 
the ruin of their potato patch. The pig had done a very 
thorough job, for the tubers were not mature and he had been 
hungry, and while Robin cast round to see in which direction 
the marauder had gone the woman gave vent to her feelings. 'It 
is all Punwa's father's fault', she said. 'It was his turn for the 
gun last night, and instead of staying at home and looking after 
his own property he must need go and sit up in Kalu's wheat 
field because he thought there was a chance of shooting a 



sambhar there. And while he was away; this is what the shaitan 
has done . 1 No woman in our part of India ever refers to her 
husband, or addresses him, by name. Before children are born 
he is referred to as the man of the house, and after children 
come is spoken of and addressed as the father of the firstborn. 
Mothi now had three children, of whom the eldest was Punwa, 
so to his wife he was 'Punwa's father', and his wife to everyone 
in the village was 'Punwa's mother'. 

Punwa's mother was not only the hardest-working woman in 
our village but she also had the sharpest tongue, and after 
telling me in no uncertain terms what she thought of Punwa's 
father for having absented himself the previous night, she 
turned on me and said I had wasted my money in building a 
wall over which a pig could climb to eat her potatoes, and that 
if I could not shoot the pig myself it was my duty to raise the 
wall a few feet so that no pig could climb over it. Mothi 
fortunately arrived while the storm was still breaking over my 
head, so whistling to Robin I beat a hasty retreat and left him 
to weather it. 

That evening I picked up the tracks of the pig on the far side of 
the wall and followed them for two miles, at times along game 
paths and at times along the bank of the Boar River, until they 
led me to a dense patch of thorn bushes interlaced with 
lantana. At the edge of this cover I took up position, as there 
was a fifty- fifty chance of the pig leaving the cover while there 
was still sufficient light for me to shoot by. Shortly after I had 
taken up position behind a rock on the bank of the river, a 
sambhar hind started belling at the upper end of the jungle in 
which a few years later I was to shoot the Bachelor of 
Powalgarh. The hind was warning the jungle folk of the 
presence of a tiger. A fortnight previously a party of three guns, 
with eight elephants, had arrived in Kaladhungi with the 
express purpose of shooting a tiger which, at that time, had his 
headquarters in the forest block for which I had a shooting 
pass. 



The Boar River formed the boundary between my block and the 
block taken by the party of three guns, and they had enticed 
the tiger to kill in their block by tying up fourteen young 
buffaloes on their side of the river. Two of these buffaloes had 
been killed by the tiger, the other twelve had died of neglect, 
and at about nine o'clock the previous night I had heard the 
report of a heavy rifle. I sat behind the rock for two hours, 
listening to the belling sambhar but without seeing anything of 
the pig, and when there was no longer any light to shoot by I 
crossed the river and, gaining the Kota road, loped down it, 
easing up and moving cautiously when passing the caves in 
which a big python lived, and where Bill Bailey of the Forest 
Department a month previously had shot a twelve-foot 
hamadryad. At the village gate I stopped and shouted to Mothi 
to be ready to accompany me at crack of dawn next morning. 

Mothi had been my constant companion in the Kaladhungi 
jungles for many years. He was keen and intelligent, gifted 
with good eyesight and hearing, could move through the 
jungles silently, and was as brave as man could be. He was 
never late for an appointment, and as we walked through the 
dew- drenched jungle that morning, listening to the multitude 
of sounds of the awakening jungle folk, I told him of the belling 
of the sambhar hind and of my suspicion that she had 
witnessed the killing of her young one by the tiger, and that she 
had stayed to watch the tiger on his kill— a not uncommon 
occurrence— for in no other way could I account for her 
sustained belling. 

Mothi was delighted at the prospect of our finding a fresh kill, 
for his means only permitted of his buying meat for his family 
once a month, and a sambhar, chital, or pig, freshly killed by a 
tiger or by a leopard, was a godsend to him. I had located the 
belling sambhar as being due north and some fifteen hundred 
yards from me the previous evening, and when we arrived at 
this spot and found no kill we started looking on the ground for 
blood, hair, or a drag mark that would lead us to the kill; for I 
was still convinced that there was a kill to be found and that 



the killer was a tiger. 

At this spot two shallow depressions, coming down from the 
foot of the hill a few hundred yards away met. The depressions 
ran more or less parallel to each other at a distance of about 
thirty yards and Mothi suggested that he should go up the 
right-hand depression while I went up the other. As there were 
only low bushes between, and we should be close to, and within 
sight of, each other, I agreed to the suggestion. 

We had proceeded a hundred yards examining every foot of the 
ground, and going dead slow, when Mothi, just as I turned my 
head to look at him started backwards, screaming as he did so. 
Then he whipped round and ran for dear life, beating the air 
with his hands as if warding off a swarm of bees and continuing 
to scream as he ran. The sudden and piercing scream of a 
human being in a jungle where a moment before all has been 
silent is terrifying to hear, and guite impossible to describe. 
Instinctively I knew what had happened. With his eyes fixed on 
the ground, looking for blood or hair, Mothi had failed to see 
where he was going, and had walked on to the tiger. Whether 
he had been badly mauled or not I could not see, for only his 
head and shoulders were visible above the bushes. I kept the 
sights of my rifle a foot behind him as he ran, intending to 
press the trigger if I saw any movement, but to my intense 
relief there was no movement as I swung round, and after he 
had covered a hundred yards I considered he was safe. I yelled 
to him to stop, adding that I was coming to him, then, backing 
away for a few yards, for I did not know whether the tiger had 
changed his position I hurried down the depression towards 
Mothi. He was standing with his back against a tree and I was 
greatly relieved to see that there was no blood on him or on the 
ground on which he was standing. As I reached him he asked 
what had happened, and when I told him that nothing had 
happened he expressed great surprise. He asked if the tiger 
had not sprung at him, or followed him; and when I replied that 
he had done everything possible to make the tiger do so, he 
said, 'I know. Sahib. I know I should not have screamed and 



run, but I— could— not— help— 1 as his voice tailed away and 
his head came forward I caught him by the throat, but he 
slipped through my hands and slumped to the ground. Every 
drop of blood had drained from his face, and as he lay minute 
after long minute without any movement, I feared the shock 
had killed him. 

There is little one can do in the jungles in an emergency of this 
kind, and that little I did. I stretched Mothi on his back, 
loosened his clothes, and massaged the region of his heart. Just 
as I was giving up hope and preparing to carry him home, he 
opened his eyes. 

When Mothi was comfortably seated on the ground with his 
back to the tree and a half-smoked cigarette between his lips I 
asked him to tell me exactly what had happened. 

'I had gone a short distance up the depression after I left you', 
he said, 'closely examining the ground for traces of blood or 
hair, when I saw what looked like a spot of dry blood on a leaf. 
So I stooped down to have a closer look and, as I raised my 
head, I looked straight into the face of the tiger. The tiger was 
lying crouched down facing me at a distance of three or four 
paces. His head was a little raised off the ground; his mouth 
was wide open, and there was blood on his chin and on his 
chest. He looked as though he was on the point of springing at 
me, so I lost my head and screamed and ran away. 

He had seen nothing of the sambhar kill. He said the ground 
was open and free of bushes and there was no kill where the 
tiger was lying. 

Telling Mothi to stay where he was I stubbed out my cigarette 
and set off to investigate, for I could think of no reason why a 
tiger with its mouth open, and blood on its chin and on its 
chest, should allow Mothi to approach within a few feet, over 
open ground, and not kill him when he screamed in its face. 
Going with the utmost caution to the spot where Mothi was 
standing when he screamed, I saw in front of me a bare patch 



of ground from which the tiger had swept the carpet of dead 
leaves as he had rolled from side to side; at the nearer edge of 
this bare patch of ground there was a semicircle of clotted 
blood. Skirting round where the tiger had been lying, to avoid 
disturbing the ground, I picked up on the far side of it a light 
and fresh blood trail, which for no apparent reason zigzagged 
towards the hill, and then continued along the foot of the hill 
for a few hundred yards and entered a deep and narrow ravine 
in which there was a little stream. Up this ravine, which ran 
deep into the foothills, the tiger had gone. I made my way back 
to the bare patch of ground and examined the clotted blood. 
There were splinters of bone and teeth in it, and these splinters 
provided me with the explanation I was looking for. The rifle¬ 
shot I had heard two nights previously had shattered the tiger's 
lower jaw, and he had made for the jungle in which he had his 
home. He had gone as far as his sufferings and loss of blood 
permitted and had then lain down on the spot where first the 
sambhar had seen him tossing about, and where thirty hours 
later Mothi walked on to him. 

The most painful wound that can be inflicted on an animal, the 
shattering of the lower jaw, had guite evidently induced high 
fever and the poor beast had perhaps only been semiconscious 
when he heard Mothi screaming in his face. He had got up 
quietly and staggered away, in a last effort to reach the ravine 
in which he knew there was water. 

To make quite sure that my deductions were correct Mothi and 
I crossed the river into the adjoining shooting block to have a 
look at the ground where the fourteen buffaloes had been tied 
up. Here, high up in a tree, we found the machan the three 
guns had sat on, and the kill the tiger had been eating when 
fired at. From the kill a heavy blood trail led down to the river, 
with elephant tracks on each side of it. Leaving Mothi on the 
right bank I recrossed the river into my block, picked up the 
blood trail and the elephant tracks, and followed them for five 
or six hundred yards to where the blood trail led into heavy 
cover. At the edge of the cover the elephants had halted and. 



after standing about for some time, had turned to the right and 
gone away in the direction of Kaladhungi. I had met the 
returning elephants as I was starting out the previous evening 
to try and get a shot at the old pig, and one of the guns had 
asked me where I was going, and when I told him, had 
appeared to want to tell me something but was restrained from 
doing so by his companions. So, while the party of three guns 
went off on their elephants to the Forest Bungalow where they 
were staying, I had gone off on foot, without any warning, into 
the jungle in which they had left a wounded tiger. 

The walk back to the village from where I had left Mothi was 
only about three miles, but it took us about as many hours to 
cover the distance, for Mothi was unaccountably weak and had 
to rest frequently. After leaving him at his house I went straight 
to the Forest Bungalow, where I found the party of three 
packed up and on the point of leaving to catch the evening 
train at Haldwani. We talked on the steps of the veranda for 
some little time, I doing most of the talking, and when I learnt 
that the only reason they could not spare the time to recover 
the tiger they had wounded was the keeping of a social 
engagement, I told them that if Mothi died as a result of shock 
or if the tiger killed any of my tenants, they would have to face 
a charge of manslaughter. The party left after my talk with 
them, and next morning, armed with a heavy rifle, I entered the 
ravine up which the tiger had gone, not with the object of 
recovering a trophy for others, but with the object of putting 
the tiger out of his misery and burning his skin. The ravine, 
every foot of which I knew, was the last place I would have 
selected in which to look for a wounded tiger. However, I 
searched it from top to bottom, and also the hills on either side, 
for the whole of that day without finding any trace of the tiger, 
for the blood trail had stopped shortly after he entered the 
ravine. 

Ten days later a forest guard on his rounds came on the 
remains of a tiger that had been eaten by vultures. In the 
summer of that year Government made a rule prohibiting 



sitting up for tigers between the hours of sunset and sunrise, 
and making it incumbent on sportsmen wounding tigers to 
make every effort to bring the wounded animal to bag, and to 
make an immediate report of the occurrence to the nearest 
Forest Officer and police outpost. Mothi met with his 
experience in December, and when we left Kaladhungi in April 
he appeared to be little the worse for the shock. But his luck 
was out, for a month later be was badly mauled by a leopard he 
wounded one night in his field and followed next morning into 
heavy covers and he had hardly recovered from his wounds 
when he had the misfortune of being responsible for the death 
of a cow— the greatest crime a Hindu can commit. The cow, an 
old and decrepit animal that had strayed in from an adjoining 
village, was grazing in Mothi's field, and as he attempted to 
drive it out it put its hoof in a deep rat-hole and broke its leg. 
For weeks Mothi attended assiduously to the cow as it lay in his 
field, but it died eventually, and the matter being too serious 
for the village priest to deal with, he ordered Mothi to make a 
pilgrimage to Hardwar. So, having borrowed money for the 
journey, to Hardwar Mothi went. Here to the head priest at the 
main temple Mothi confessed his crime, and after that 
dignitary had given the offence due consideration he ordered 
Mothi to make a donation to the temple: this would absolve him 
of his crime, but in order to show repentance he would have 
also to do penance. The priest then asked him from what acts 
he derived most pleasure and Mothi, being without guile, made 
answer that he derived most pleasure from shooting, and from 
eating meat. Mothi was then told by the priest that in future he 
must refrain from these two pleasures. 

Mothi returned from his pilgrimage cleared of his crime, but 
burdened with a lifelong penance. His opportunities-for 
shooting had been few, for besides having to share the muzzle¬ 
loading gun with others he had had to confine his shooting to 
the village boundaries, as no man in his position was permitted 
to shoot in Government forests; even so, Mothi had derived 
great pleasure from the old gun, and from the occasional shots 



I had permitted him— against all rules— to fire from my rifle. 
Hard as this half of his penance was the second half was even 
harder, and, moreover, it adversely affected his health. Though 
his means had only allowed him to buy a small meat ration 
once a month, pigs and porcupines were plentiful, and deer 
occasionally strayed into the fields at night. It was the custom 
in our village, a custom to which I also adhered, for an animal 
shot by one to be shared by all, so Mothi had not had to depend 
entirely on the meat he could buy. 

It was during the winter following his pilgrimage to Hardwar 
that Mothi developed a hacking cough. As the remedies we 
tried failed to give relief, I got a doctor friend who was passing 
through Kaladhungi to examine him, and was horrified to learn 
that he was suffering from tuberculosis. On the doctor's 
recommendation I sent Mothi to the Bhowali Sanatorium, thirty 
miles away. Five days later he returned with a letter from the 
Superintendent of the Sanatorium saying that the case was 
hopeless, and that for this reason the Superintendent regretted 
he could not admit Mothi. A medical missionary who was 
staying with us at the time, and who had worked for years in a 
sanatorium, advised us to make Mothi sleep in the open and 
drink a quart of milk with a few drops of paraffin in it each 
morning. So for the rest of that winter Mothi slept in the open, 
and while sitting on our veranda, smoking a cigarette and 
talking to me, each morning drank a quart of milk fresh from 
our cows. 

The poor of India are fatalists, and in addition have little 
stamina to fight disease. Deprived of our company, though not 
of our help, Mothi lost hope when we left for our summer 
home, and died a month later. The women of our foothills are 
the hardest workers in India, and the hardest working of them 
all was Mothi's widow, Punwa's mother. A small compact 
woman, as hard as flint and a beaver for work— young enough 
to remarry but precluded from doing so by reasons of her caste 
— she-bravely and resolutely faced the future, and right 
gallantly she fulfilled her task, ably assisted by her young 



children. Of her three children, Punwa, the eldest, was now 
twelve, and with the assistance of neighbors was able to do the 
ploughing and other field jobs. 

Kunthi, a girl, was ten and married, and until she left the 
village five years later to join her husband she assisted her 
mother in all her thousand and one tasks, which included 
cooking the food and washing up the dishes; washing and 
mending the clothes— for Punwa's mother was very particular 
about her own and her children's dress, and no matter how old 
and patched the garments were, they always had to be clean;, 
fetching water from the irrigation furrow or from the Boar river 
for domestic purposes; bringing firewood from the jungles, and 
grass and tender young leaves for the milch, cows and their 
calves; weeding and cutting the crops; husking the paddy, in a 
hole cut in a slab of rock, with an iron shod staff that was heavy 
enough to tire the muscles of any man; winnowing the wheat 
for Punwa to take to the watermill to be ground into atta; and 
making frequent visits to the bazaar two miles away to drive 
hard bargains for the few articles of food and clothing the 
family could afford to buy Sher Singh, the youngest child, was 
eight, and from the moment he opened his eyes at crack of 
dawn each morning until he closed them when the evening 
meal had been eaten he did everything that a boy could do. He 
even gave Punwa a hand with the ploughing, though he had to 
be helped at the end of each furrow as he was not strong 
enough to turn the plough. 

Sher Singh, without a care in the world, was the happiest child 
in the village. When he could not be seen he could always be 
heard, for he loved to sing. The cattle four bullocks, twelve 
cows, eight calves, and Lalu the bull — were his special charge, 
and each morning after milking the cows he released the herd 
from the stakes to which he had tethered them the evening 
before, drove them out of the shed and through a wicket in the 
boundary wall, and then set to clean up the shed. It would now 
be time for the morning meal, and when he heard the call from 
his brother, or Kunthi, he would hurry home across the fields 



taking the milk can with him. The frugal morning meal 
consisted of fresh hot chapatis and dal, liberally seasoned with 
green chillies and salt and cooked in mustard oil. Having 
breakfasted, and finished any chores about the house that he 
was called upon to do, Sher Singh would begin his day's real 
work. This was to graze the cattle in the jungle, prevent them 
from straying, and guard them against leopards and tigers. 
Having collected the four bullocks and twelve cows from the 
open ground beyond the boundary wall, where they would be 
lying basking in the sun, and left Kunthi to keep an eye on the 
calves, this small tousle-headed boy, his axe over his shoulder 
and Lalu the bull following him, would drive his charges over 
the Boar Bridge and into the dense jungle beyond, calling to 
each by name. 

Lalu was a young scrub bull destined to be a plough-bullock 
when he had run his course but who, at the time I am writing 
about, was free of foot and the pride of Sher Singh his foster- 
brother, for Lalu had shared his mother's milk with Sher Singh. 
Sher Singh had christened his foster-brother Lalu, which 
means red. But Lalu was not red. He was of a light dun colour, 
with stronger markings on the shoulders and a dark, almost 
black line running down the length of his back. His horns were 
short, sharp, and strong, with the light and dark colourings 
associated with the shoehorns that adorned dressing tables of 
that period. 

When human beings and animals live in close association with 
each other under conditions in which they are daily subjected 
to common dangers, each infuses the other with a measure of 
courage and confidence which the one possesses and the other 
lacks. Sher Singh, whose father and grandfather had been 
more at home in the jungles than in the walks of men, had no 
fear of anything that walked, and Lalu, young and vigorous, 
had unbounded confidence in himself. So while Sher Singh 
infused Lalu with courage, Lalu in turn infused Sher Singh with 
confidence. In consequence Sher Singh's cattle grazed where 
others feared to go, and he was justly proud of the fact that 



they were in better condition than any others in the village, and 
that no-leopard or tiger had ever taken toll of them. 

Four miles from our village there is a valley about five miles in 
length, running north and south, which has no equal in beauty 
or richness of wild life in the five thousand square miles of 
forest land in the United Provinces. At the upper end of the 
valley a clear stream, which grows in volume as it progresses, 
gushes from a cave in which a python lives, from under the 
roots of an old jamun tree. This crystal-clear stream with its 
pools and runs is alive with many kinds of small fish on which 
live no fewer than five varieties of kingfishers. 

In the valley grow flowering and fruit-bearing trees and bushes 
that attract a multitude of nectar-drinking and fruit-eating 
birds and animals, which in turn attract predatory birds and 
carnivorous animals which find ample cover in the dense 
undergrowth and matted cane-brakes. In places the set of the 
stream has caused miniature landslides, and on these grows a 
reedy kind of grass, with broad lush leaves, much fancied by 
sambhar and kakar. 

The valley was a favourite haunt of mine. One winter -evening, 
shortly after our descent to Kaladhungi from our summer 
home, I was standing at a point where there is a clear view into 
the valley when, in a clump of grass to the left, I saw a 
movement. After a long scrutiny the movement revealed itself 
as an animal feeding on the lush grass on a steep slope. The 
animal was too light for a sambhar and too big for a kakar, so I 
set out to stalk it, and as I did so a tiger started calling in the 
valley a few hundred yards lower down. My quarry also heard 
the tiger, and as it raised its head I saw to my surprise that it 
was Lalu. With head poised he stood perfectly still listening to 
the tiger, and when it stopped calling, he unconcernedly 
resumed cropping the grass. This was forbidden ground for 
Lalu, for cattle are not permitted to graze in Government 
Reserved Forests, and moreover Lalu was in danger from the 
tiger; so I called to him by name and, after a little hesitation, he 



came up the steep bank and we returned to the village 
together. Sher Singh was tying up his cattle in the shed when 
we arrived, and when I told him where I had found Lalu he 
laughed and said, 'Don't fear for this one. Sahib. The forest 
guard is a friend of mine and would not impound my Lalu, and 
as for the tiger, Lalu is well able to take care of himself.' 

Not long after this incident, the Chief Conservator of Forests, 
Smythies, and his wife arrived on tour in Kaladhungi, and as 
the camels carrying their camp equipment were coming down 
the forest road towards the Boar Bridge, a tiger killed a cow on 
the road in front of them. On the approach of the camels, and 
the shouting of the men with them, the tiger left the cow on the 
road and bounded into the jungle. The Smythies were sitting on 
our veranda having morning coffee when the camel men 
brought word of the killing of the cow. Mrs. Smythies was keen 
to shoot the tiger, so I went off with two of her men to put up a 
machan for her, and found that in the meantime the tiger had 
returned and dragged the cow twenty yards into the jungle. 
When the machan was ready I sent back for Mrs. Smythies and, 
after putting her into the machan with a forest guard to keep 
her company, I climbed a tree on the edge of the road hoping to 
get a photograph of the tiger. 

It was 4 p.m. We had been in position half an hour and a kakar 
had just started barking in the direction in which we knew the 
tiger was lying up, when down the road came Lalu. On 
reaching the spot where the cow had been killed he very 
carefully smelt the ground and a big pool of blood, then turned 
to the edge of the road and with head held high and nose 
stretched out started to follow the drag. When he saw the cow 
he circled round her, tearing up the ground with his hoofs and 
snorting with rage. After tying my camera to a branch I slipped 
off the tree and conducted a very angry and protesting Lalu to 
the edge of the village. Hardly had I returned to my perch on 
the tree, however, when up the road came Lalu to make a 
second demonstration round the dead cow. Mrs. Smythies now 
sent the forest guard to drive Lalu away, and as the man passed 



me I told him to take the bull across the Boar Bridge and to 
remain there with the elephant that was coming later for Mrs. 
Smythies. The kakar had stopped barking some time previously 
and a covey of jungle fowl now started cackling a few yards 
behind the machan. Getting my camera ready I looked towards 
Mrs. Smythies, and saw she had her rifle poised, and at that 
moment Lalu appeared for the third time. (We learnt later that, 
after being taken across the bridge, he had circled round, 
crossed the river bed lower down and disappeared into the 
jungle.) This time Lalu trotted up to the cow and, either seeing 
or smelling the tiger, lowered his head and charged into the 
bushes, bellowing loudly. Three times he did this, and after 
each charge he retreated backwards to his starting-point, 
slashing upwards with his horns as he did so. I have seen 
buffaloes driving tigers away from their kills, and I have seen 
cattle doing the same with leopards but, with the exception of a 
Himalayan bear, I had never before seen a solitary animal— 
and a scrub bull at that— drive a tiger away from his kill. 

Courageous as Lalu was he was no match for the tiger, who 
was now losing his temper and answering Lalu's bellows with 
angry growls. Remembering a small boy back in the village 
whose heart would break if anything happened to his beloved 
companion, I was on the point of going to Lalu's help when 
Mrs. Smythies very sportingly gave up her chance of shooting 
the tiger, so I shouted to the mahout to bring up the elephant. 
Lalu was very subdued as he followed me to the shed where 
Sher Singh was waiting to tie him up, and I think he was as 
relieved as I was that the tiger had not accepted his challenge 
while he was defending the dead cow. The tiger fed on the cow 
that night and next evening, and while Mrs. Smythies was 
having another Unsuccessful try to get a shot at him, I took a 
cine picture which some who read this story may remember 
having seen. In the picture the tiger is seen coming down a 
steep bank, and drinking at a little pool. 

The jungle was Sher Singh's playground, the only playground 
he ever knew, just as it had been my playground as a boy, and 



of all whom I have known he alone enjoyed the jungles as much 
as I have done. Intelligent and observant, his knowledge of 
jungle lore was incredible. Nothing escaped his attention, and 
he was as fearless as the animal whose name he bore. 

Our favourite evening walk was along one of the three roads 
which met on the far side of the Boar Bridge— the abandoned 
trunk road to Moradabad, the road to Kota, and the forest road 
to Ramnagar. Most evenings at sundown we would hear Sher 
Singh before we saw him, for he sang with abandon in a clear 
treble voice that carried far as he drove his cattle home. 

Always he would greet us with a smile and a salaam, and 
always he would have something interesting to tell us. 

'The big tiger's tracks were on the road this morning coming 
from the direction of Kota and going towards Naya Gaon, and 
at midday I heard him calling at the lower end of the Dhunigad 
cane-brake.' 'Near Saryapani I heard the clattering of horns, so 
I climbed a tree and saw two chital stags righting. One of them 
has very big horns. Sahib, and is very fat, and I have eaten no 
meat for many days. 1 

'What am I carrying?'— He had something wrapped in big 
green leaves and tied round with bark balanced on his tousled 
head. 'I am carrying a pig's leg. I saw some vultures on a tree, 
so I went to have a look and under a bush I found a pig killed 
by a leopard last night and partly eaten. If you want to shoot 
the leopard. Sahib, I will take you to the kill. 1 'Today I found a 
beehive in a hollow haldu tree', he said one day, proudly 
exhibiting a large platter of leaves held together with long 
thorns on which the snow-white comb was resting. 'I have 
brought the honey for you. 1 Then, glancing at the rifle in my 
hands, he added, 'I will bring the honey to the house when I 
have finished my work for perchance you may meet a pig or a 
kakar and with the honey in your hands you would not be able 
to shoot.' The cutting of the hive out of the haldu tree with his 
small axe had probably taken him two hours or more, and he 
had got badly stung in the process, for his hands were swollen 



and one eye was nearly closed, but he said nothing about this 
and to have commented on it would have embarrassed him. 

Later that night, while we were having dinner, he slipped 
silently into the room and as he laid the brass tray, polished till 
it looked like gold, on our table, he touched the elbow of his 
right arm with the fingers of his left hand, an old hill custom 
denoting respect, which is fast dying out. After depositing such 
a gift on the table, leaving the tray for Kunthi to call for in the 
morning, Sher Singh would pause at the door and, looking 
down and scratching the carpet with his toes, would say, 'If you 
are going bird shooting tomorrow I will send Kunthi out with 
the cattle and come with you, for I know where there are a lot 
of birds'. He was always shy in a house, and on these occasions 
spoke with a catch in his voice as though he had too many 
words in his mouth and was trying, with difficulty, to swallow 
the ones that were getting in his way. 

Sher Singh was in his element on these bird shoots, which the 
boys of the village enjoyed as much as he and I did, for in 
addition to the excitement and the prospect of having a bird to 
take home at the end of the day, there was always a halt at 
midday at a prearranged spot to which the man sent out earlier 
would bring the fresh sweets and parched gram that would 
provide a meal for all. 

When I had taken my position, Sher Singh would line up his 
companions and beat the selected cover towards me, shouting 
the loudest of them all and worming his way through the 
thickest cover. When a bird was put up he would yell, 'it's 
coming. Sahib! It’s coming! 1 Or when a heavy animal went 
crashing through the undergrowth, as very frequently 
happened, he would call to his companions not to run away, 
assuring them that it was only a sambhar, or a chital, or maybe 
a sounder of pig. Ten to twelve patches of cover would be 
beaten in the course of the day, yielding as many pea fowl and 
jungle fowl, and two or three hares, and possibly a small pig or 
a porcupine. At the end of the last beat the bag would be 



shared out among the beaters and the gun, or if the bag was 
small only among the beaters and Sher Singh was never more 
happy than when, at the end of the day, he made for home with 
a peacock in full plumage proudly draped over his shoulders. 

Punwa was now married, and the day was fast approaching 
when Sher Singh would have to leave the home, for there was 
not sufficient room on the small holding of six acres for the two 
brothers. Knowing that it would break Sher Singh's heart to 
leave the village and his beloved jungles, I decided to 
apprentice him to a friend who had a garage at Kathgodam, 
and who ran a fleet of cars on the Naini Tal motor road. After 
his training it was my intention to employ Sher Singh to drive 
our car and accompany me on my shooting trips during the 
winter, and to look after our cottage and garden at Kaladhungi 
while we were in Naini Tal during the summer. Sher Singh was 
speechless with delight when I told him of the plans I had made 
for him, plans which ensured his continued residence in the 
village, and within sight and calling distance of the home he 
had never left from the day of his birth. Plans a-many we make 
in life, and I am not sure there is cause for regret when some 
go wrong. Sher Singh was to have started his apprenticeship 
when we returned to Kaladhungi in November. In October he 
contracted malignant malaria which led to pneumonia, and a 
few days before we arrived he died. During his boyhood's years 
he had sung through life happy as the day was long and, had he 
lived, who can say that his life in a changing world would have 
been as happy, and as carefree, as those first few years? Before 
leaving our home for a spell, to regain in new climes the health 
we lost in Hitler's war, I called together our tenants and their 
families as I had done on two previous occasions, to tell them 
the time had come for them to take over their holdings and run 
the village for themselves. Punwa's mother was the spokesman 
for the tenants on this occasion, and after I had had my say she 
got to her feet and, in her practical way, spoke as follows: 'You 
have called us away from our work to no purpose. We have told 
you before and we tell you again that we will not take your land 



from you, for to do so would imply that we were no longer your 
people. And now. Sahib, what about the pig, the son of the 
shaitan who climbed your wall and ate my potatoes? Punwa 
and these others cannot shoot it and I am tired of sitting up all 
night and beating a tin can. 1 

Maggie and I were walking along the fire-track that skirts the 
foothills with David at our heels when the pig— worthy son of 
the old shaitan who, full of years and pellets of buckshot, had 
been killed in an all-night fight with a tiger— trotted across the 
track. 

The sun had set and the range was long— all of three hundred 
yards— but a shot was justifiable for the pig was quite 
evidently on his way to the village. I adjusted the sights and, 
resting the rifle against a tree, waited until the pig paused at 
the edge of a deep depression. When I pressed the trigger, the 
pig jumped into the depression, scrambled out on the far side, 
and made off at top speed. 'Have you missed him?' asked 
Maggie, and with his eyes David put the same question. There 
was no reason, except miscalculation of the range, why I 
should not have hit the pig, for my silver foresight had shown 
up clearly on his black skin, and the tree had assisted me to 
take steady aim. Anyway, it was time to make for home, and as 
the cattle track down which the pig had been going would lead 
us to the Boar Bridge we set off to see the result of my shot. 

The pig's feet had bitten deeply into the ground where he had 
taken off, and on the far side of the depression, where he had 
scrambled out, there was blood. Two hundred yards in the 
direction in which the pig had gone there was a narrow strip of 
dense cover. I should probably find him dead in the morning in 
this cover, for the blood trail was heavy; but if he was not dead 
and there was trouble, Maggie would not be with me, and there 
would be more light to shoot by in the morning than there was 
now. 

Punwa had heard my shot and was waiting on the bridge for us. 
'Yes', I said, in reply to his eager inquiry,'it was the old pig I 



fired at, and judging by the blood trail, he is hit hard. 1 I added 
that if he met me on the bridge next morning I would show him 
where the pig was, so that later he could take out a party of 
men to bring it in. 'May I bring the old havildar too?' said 
Punwa, and I agreed. 

The havildar, a kindly old man who had won the respect and 
affection of all, was a Gurkha who on leaving the army had 
joined the police, and having retired a year previously had 
settled down with his wife and two sons on a plot of land we 
had given him in our village. Like all Gurkhas the havildar had 
an insatiable appetite for pig's flesh, and when a pig was shot 
by any of us it was an understood thing that, no matter who 
went short, the ex-soldier-policeman must have his share. 
Punwa and the havildar were waiting for me at the bridge next 
morning. Following the cattle track, we soon reached the spot 
where, the previous evening, I had seen the blood. From here 
we followed the well- defined blood trail which led us, as I had 
expected, to the dense cover. I left my companions at the edge 
of the cover, for a wounded pig is a dangerous animal, and with 
one exception— a bear— is the only animal in our jungles that 
has the unpleasant habit of savaging any human being who has 
the misfortune to be attacked and knocked down by him. For 
this reason wounded pigs, especially if they have big tusks, 
have to be treated with great respect. The pig had stopped 
where I had expected him to, but he had not died, and at 
daybreak he had got up from where he had been lying all night 
and left the cover. I whistled to Punwa and the havildar and 
when they rejoined me we set off to trail the animal. 

The trail led us across the fire-track, and from the direction in 
which the wounded animal was going it was evident he was 
making for the heavy jungle on the far side of the hill, from 
which I suspected he had come the previous evening. The 
morning blood trail was light and continued to get lighter the 
farther we went, until we lost it altogether in a belt of trees, 
the fallen leaves of which a gust of wind had disturbed. In front 
of us at this spot was a tinder-dry stretch of waist-high grass. 



Still under the conviction that the pig was heading for the 
heavy jungle on the far side of the hill, I entered the grass, 
hoping to pick up the tracks again on the far side. 

The havildar had lagged some distance behind, but Punwa was 
immediately behind me when, after we had gone a few yards 
into the grass, my woollen stockings caught on the thorns of a 
low bush. While I was stooping to free myself, Punwa, to avoid 
the thorns, moved a few paces to the right and I just got free 
and was straightening up when out of the grass shot the pig 
and with an angry grunt went straight for Punwa, who was 
wearing a white shirt. I then did what I have always asked 
companions who have accompanied me into the jungles after 
dangerous game to do if they saw me attacked by a wounded 
animal. I threw the muzzle of my rifle into the air, and shouted 
at the top of my voice as I pressed the trigger. 

If the thorns had not caught in my stockings and lost me a 
fraction of a second, all would have been well, for I should have 
killed the pig before it got to Punwa; but once the pig had 
reached him the only thing I could do to help him was to try to 
cause a diversion, for to have fired in his direction would 
further have endangered his life. As the bullet was leaving my 
rifle to land in the jungle a mile away, Punwa, with adespairing 
scream of 'Sahib 1 , was falling backwards into the grass with the 
pig right on top of him, but at my shout and the crack of the 
rifle the pig turned like a whiplash straight for me, and before I 
was able to eject the spent cartridge and ram a fresh one into 
the chamber of the -275 rifle, he was at me. Taking my right 
hand from the rifle I stretched the arm out palm downwards, 
and as my hand came in contact with his forehead he stopped 
dead, for no other reason than that my time had not come, for 
he was big and angry enough to have knocked over and 
savaged a cart horse. The pig's body had stopped but his head 
was very active, and as he cut upwards with his great tusks, 
first on one side and then on the other, fortunately cutting only 
the air, he wore the skin off the palm of my hand with his rough 
forehead. Then, for no apparent reason, he turned away, and as 



he made off I put two bullets into him in quick succession and 
he pitched forward on his head. 

After that one despairing scream Punwa had made no sound or 
movement, and with the awful thought of what I would say to 
his mother, and the still more awful thought of what she would 
say to me, I went with fear and trembling to where he was 
lying out of sight in the grass, expecting to find him ripped 
open from end to end. He was laying full stretch on his back, 
and his eyes were closed, but to my intense relief I saw no 
blood on his white clothes. I shook him by the shoulder and 
asked him how he was, and where he had been hurt. In a very 
weak voice he said he was dead, and that his back was broken. 

I straddled his body and gently raised him to a sitting position, 
and was overjoyed to find that he was able to retain this 
position when I released my hold. Passing my hand down his 
back I assured him that it was not broken, and after he had 
verified this fact with his own hand, he turned his head and 
looked behind him to where a dry stump was projecting two or 
three inches above the ground. Evidently he had fainted when 
the pig knocked him over and, on coming to, feeling the stump 
boring into his back, had jumped to the conclusion that it was 
broken. 

And so the old pig, son of the shaitan, died, and in dying nearly 
frightened the lives out of two of us. But beyond rubbing a little 
skin off my hand he did us no harm, for Punwa escaped without 
a scratch and with a grand story to tell. The havildar, like the 
wise old soldier he was, had remained in the background. None 
the less he claimed a lion's share of the pig, for had he not 
stood foursquare in reserve to render assistance if assistance 
had been called for? And further, was it not the custom for 
those present at a killing to receive a double share, and what 
difference was there between seeing and hearing the shots that 
had killed the pig? So a double share was not denied him, and 
he too, in the course of time, had a grand story to tell of the 
part he took in that morning's exploit. 



Punwa now reigns, and is raising a family, in the house I built 
for his father. Kunthi has left the village to join her husband, 
and Sher Singh waits in the Happy Hunting Grounds. Punwa's 
mother is still alive, and if you stop at the village gate and walk 
through the fields to Punwa's house you will find her keeping 
house for Punwa and his family and working as hard and as 
cheerfully at her thousand and one tasks as she worked when 
she first came to our village as Mothi's bride. During the war 
years Maggie spent the winters alone in our cottage at 
Kaladhungi, without transport, and fourteen miles from the 
nearest settlement. Her safety gave me no anxiety, for I knew 
she was safe among my friends, the poor of India. 



IV - Pre-Red-Tape Days 

I WAS camping with Anderson one winter in the Terai, the low- 
lying stretch of country at the foot of the Himalayas, and 
having left Bindukhera after breakfast one morning in early 
January we made a wide detour to Boksar, our next camping- 
place, to give our servants time to pack up and pitch our tents 
before our arrival. 

There were two small unbridged rivers to cross between 
Bindukhera and Boksar, and at the second of these rivers one 
of the camels carrying our tents slipped on the clay bottom and 
deposited its load in the river. This accident resulted in a long 
delay, with the result that we arrived at Boksar, after a very 
successful day's black partridge shooting, while our kit was still 
being unloaded from the camels. The camp site was only a few 
hundred yards from Boksar village, and as Anderson's arrival 
was a great event, the entire population had turned out to pay 
their respects to him and to render what assistance they could 
in setting up our camp. 

Sir Frederick Anderson was at that time Superintendent of the 
Terai and Bhabar Government Estates, and by reason of the 
large amount of the milk of human kindness that he was 
endowed with he had endeared himself to the large population, 
embracing all castes and creeds, living in the many thousands 
of square miles of country he ruled over. In addition to his 
kindly nature, Anderson was a great administrator and was 
gifted with a memory which I have only seen equalled in one 
other man. General Sir Henry Ramsay, who for twenty-eight 
years administered the same tract of country, and who 
throughout his service was known as the Uncrowned King of 
Kumaon. Both Ramsay and Anderson were Scotsmen, and it 
was said of them that once having heard a name or seen a face 
they never forgot it. It is only those who have had dealings with 
simple uneducated people who can realize the value of a good 
memory, for nothing appeals so much to a humble man as the 
remembering of his name, or the circumstances in which he 



has previously been met. 

When the history of the rise and fall of British Imperialism is 
written, due consideration will have to be given to the 
important part red tape played in the fall of the British raj. 

Both Ramsay and Anderson served India at a time when red 
tape was unknown, and their popularity and the success of 
their administration was in great measure due to their hands' 
not being tied with it. 

Ramsay, in addition to being Judge of Kumaon, was also 
magistrate, policeman, forest officer, and engineer, and as his 
duties were manifold and onerous he performed many of them 
while walking from one camp to another. It was his custom 
while on these long walks, and while accompanied by a crowd 
of people, to try all his civil and criminal cases. The 
complainant and his witnesses were first heard, and then the 
defendant and his witnesses, and after due deliberation, 
Ramsay would pronounce judgment, which might be either a 
fine or a sentence to imprisonment. In no case was his 
judgment known to be questioned, nor did any man whom he 
had sentenced to a fine or imprisonment fail to pay the fine into 
the Government Treasury or fail to report himself at the 
nearest jail to carry out the term of simple or rigorous 
imprisonment to which Ramsay had sentenced him. As 
Superintendent of the Terai and Bhabar, Anderson had only to 
perform a part of the duties that had been performed by his 
predecessor Ramsay, but he had wide administrative powers, 
and that afternoon, while our tents were being pitched on the 
camping ground at Boksar, Anderson told the assembled people 
to sit down, adding that he would listen to any complaints they 
had to make and receive any petitions they wished to present. 

The first petition came from the headman of a village adjoining 
Boksar. It appeared that this village and Boksar had a joint 
irrigation channel that served both villages, and that ran 
through Boksar. Owing to the partial failure of the monsoon 
rains, the water in the channel had not been sufficient for both 



villages and Boksar village had used it all, with the result that 
the paddy crop of the lower village had been ruined. The 
headman of Boksar admitted that no water had been allowed to 
go down the channel to the lower village and justified his 
action by pointing out that, if the water had been shared, the 
paddy crops of both villages would have been ruined. The crop 
had been harvested and threshed a few days before our arrival, 
and after Anderson had heard what the two headmen had to 
say, he ordered that the paddy should be divided up according 
to the acreage of the two villages. The people of Boksar 
acknowledged the justice of this decision, but claimed they 
were entitled to payment of the labour that had been employed 
in harvesting and threshing the crop. To this claim the lower 
village objected on the ground that no request had been made 
to them for help while the Boksar crop was being harvested 
and threshed. Anderson upheld the objection, and while the 
two headmen went off to divide the paddy the next petition was 
presented to him. 

This was from Chadi, accusing Kalu of having abducted his wife 
Tilni. Chadi's complaint was that three weeks previously Kalu 
had made advances to Tilni; that in spite of his protests Kalu 
had persisted in his advances; and that ultimately Tilni had left 
his hut and taken up residence with Kalu. When Anderson 
asked if Kalu was present, a man sitting at the edge of the 
semicircle in front of us stood up and said he was Kalu. 

While the case of the paddy had been under discussion the 
assembled women and girls had shown little interest, for that 
was a matter to be decided by their menfolk. But this abduction 
case, judging from the expression on their faces and the sharp 
intakes of breath, was one in which they were all intensely 
interested. 

When Anderson asked Kalu if he admitted the charge that 
Chadi had brought against him, he admitted that Tilni was 
living in the hut he had provided for her but he stoutly denied 
that he had abducted her. When asked if he was prepared to 



return Tilni to her lawful husband, Kalu replied that Tilni had 
come to him of her own free will and that he was not prepared 
to force her to return to Chadi. 'Is Tilni present ? 1 asked 
Anderson. A girl from among the group of women came 
forward and said, 'I am Tilni. What does Your Honour want with 
me ? 1 

Tilni was a clean-limbed attractive young girl, some eighteen 
years of age. Her hair, done in a foot-high cone in the 
traditional manner of the women of the Terai, was draped with 
a white-bordered black sari, her upper person was encased in a 
tight-fitting red bodice, and a voluminous gaily coloured skirt 
completed her costume. When asked by Anderson why she had 
left her husband, she pointed to Chadi and said, 'Look at him. 
Not only is he dirty, as you can see, but he is also a miser; and 
during the two years I have been married to him he has not 
given me any clothes, nor has he given me any jewellery. These 
clothes that you are looking at and this jewellery', she said, 
touching some silver bangles on her wrists, and several strings 
of glass beads round her neck/ were given to me by Kalu.' 
Asked if she was willing to go back to Chadi, Tilni tossed her 
head and said nothing would induce her to do so. 

This aboriginal tribe, living in the unhealthy Terai, is renowned 
for two sterling qualities— cleanliness, and the independence 
of the women. In no other part of India are villages and the 
individual dwellings as spotlessly clean as they are in the Terai, 
and in no other part of India would a young girl have dared or 
in fact been permitted, to stand before a mixed gathering 
including two white men to plead her own cause. Chadi was 
now asked by Anderson if he had any suggestions to make, to 
which he replied: 'You are my mother and my father. I came to 
you for justice, and if Your Honour is not prepared to compel 
my wife to return to me, I claim compensation for her . 1 'To what 
extent do you claim compensation for her?' asked Anderson, to 
which Chadi replied, 'I claim one hundred and fifty rupees'. 
From all sides of the semicircle there were now exclamations of 
'He claims too much', 'far too much', and 'She is not worth it'. 



On being asked by Anderson if he was willing to pay one 
hundred and fifty rupees for Tilni, Kalu said the price 
demanded was excessive and added that he knew, as everyone 
in Boksar knew, that Chadi had only paid a hundred rupees for 
Tilni. This price, he argued, had been paid for Tilni when she 
was 'new 1 , and as this was no longer the case the most he was 
willing to pay was fifty rupees. The assembled people now took 
sides; some maintaining that the sum demanded was too great, 
while others as vigorously maintained that the sum offered was 
too small. Eventually, after giving due consideration to the 
arguments for and against— arguments that went into very 
minute and very personal details, and to which Tilni listened 
with an amused smile on her pretty face— Anderson fixed the 
price of Tilni at seventy-five rupees, and this sum Kalu was 
ordered to pay Chadi. Opening his waistband, Kalu produced a 
string purse, and emptied it on the carpet at Anderson's feet. 
The contents amounted to fifty-two silver rupees. When two of 
Kalu's friends had come to his assistance and added another 
twenty-three rupees, Chadi was told to count the money. When 
he had done so and stated that the sum was correct, a woman 
whom I had noticed coming very slowly and apparently very 
painfully from the direction of the village after all the others 
were seated and who had sat down a little apart from the rest, 
got with some difficulty to her feet and said, 'What about me. 
Your Honour?' 'Who are you?' asked Anderson. 'I am Kalu's 
wife', she replied. 

She was a tall gaunt woman, every drop of blood drained from 
her ivory-white face, her body-line distorted with an enormous 
spleen, and her feet swollen— the result of malaria, the 
scourge of the Terai. 

In a tired, toneless voice the woman said that now that Kalu 
had purchased another wife she would be homeless; and as she 
had no relatives in the village, and was too ill to work, she 
would die of neglect and starvation. Then she covered her face 
with her sari and began to cry silently, great sobs shaking her 
wasted frame and tears splashing down on her distorted body. 



Here was an unexpected and an unfortunate complication, and 
one that was for Anderson difficult of solution, for while the 
case had been under discussion there had been no hint that 
Kalu already had a wife. 

The uncomfortable silence following on the woman's pitiful 
outburst had lasted some time when Tilni, who had remained 
standing, ran across to the poor weeping woman, and flinging 
her strong young arms round her said, 'Don't cry, sister, don't 
cry; and don't say you are homeless, for I will share the new 
hut Kalu has built for me with you, and I will take care of you 
and nurse you and one half of all that Kalu gives me I will give 
you. So don't cry any more, sister, and now come with me and I 
will take you to our hut.' As Tilni and the sick woman moved 
off, Anderson stood up and, blowing his nose violently, said the 
wind coming down from the hills had given him a damned cold, 
and that the proceedings were closed for the day. The wind 
coming down from the hills appeared to have affected others in 
the same way as it had affected Anderson, for his was not the 
only nose that was in urgent need of blowing. But the 
proceedings were not quite over, for Chadi now approached 
Anderson and asked for the return of his petition. Having torn 
his petition into small bits, Chadi took the piece of cloth in 
which he had tied up the seventy-five rupees from his pocket, 
opened it and said: 'Kalu and I be men of the same village, and 
as he has now two mouths to feed, one of which requires 
special food, he will need all his money. So permit me. Your 
Honour, to return this money to him.' 

While touring his domain, Anderson and his predecessors in 
pre-red-tape days settled to the mutual satisfaction of all 
concerned hundreds, nay thousands, of cases similar to these, 
without the contestants being put to one pice of expense. Now, 
since the introduction of red tape, these cases are taken to 
courts of law where both the complainant and the defendant 
are bled white, and where seeds of dissension are sown that 
inevitably lead to more and more court cases, to the 
enrichment of the legal profession and the ruin of the poor. 



simple, honest, hardworking peasantry. 



V - The Law of the Jungles 

HARKWAR and Kunthi were married before their total ages had 
reached double figures. This was quite normal in the India of 
those days, and would possibly still have been so had Mahatma 
Gandhi and Miss Mayo never lived. Harkwar and Kunthi lived 
in villages a few miles apart at the foot of the great Dunagiri 
Mountain, and had never seen each other until the great day 
when, dressed in bright new clothes, they had for all too short 
a time been the centre of attraction of a vast crowd of relatives 
and friends. That day lived long in their memories as the 
wonderful occasion when they had been able to fill their small 
bellies to bursting-point with halwa and puris. The day also 
lived for long years in the memory of their respective fathers, 
for on it the village bania, who was their 'father and mother', 
realizing their great necessity had provided the few rupees that 
had enabled them to retain the respect of their community by 
marrying their children at the age that which children should 
be married, and on the propitious date selected by the priest of 
the village— and had made a fresh entry against their names in 
his register. 

True, the fifty per cent, interest demanded for the 
accommodation was excessive, but, God willing, a part of it 
would be paid, for there were other children yet to be married, 
and who but the good bania was there to help them? Kunthi 
returned to her father's home after her wedding and for the 
next few years performed all the duties that children are called 
upon to perform in the homes of the very poor. The only 
difference her married state made in her life was that she was 
no longer permitted to wear the one-piece dress that 
unmarried girls wear. Her new costume now consisted of three 
pieces, a chaddar a yard and a half long, one end of which was 
tucked into her skirt and the other draped over her head, a tiny 
sleeveless bodice, and a skirt a few inches long. 

Several uneventful and care free years went by for Kunthi until 
the day came when she was judged old enough to join her 



husband. Once again the bania came to the rescue and, arrayed 
in her new clothes, a very tearful girl-bride set out for the home 
of her boy-husband. The change from one home to another only 
meant for Kunthi the performing of chores for her mother-in- 
law which she had previously performed for her mother. There 
are no drones in a poor man's household in India; young and 
old have their allotted work to do and they do it cheerfully. 
Kunthi was now old enough to help with the cooking, and as 
soon as the morning meal had been eaten all who were capable 
of working for wages set out to perform their respective tasks, 
which, no matter how minor they were, brought grist to the 
family mill. Harkwar's father was a mason and was engaged on 
building a chapel at the American Mission School. I was 
Harkwar's ambition to follow in his father's profession and, 
until he had the strength to do so, he helped the family 
exchequer by carrying the materials used by his father and the 
other masons, earning two annas a day for his ten hours' 
labour. 

The crops on the low irrigated lands were ripening, and after 
Kunthi had washed and polished the metal pots and pans used 
for the morning meal she accompanied her mother-in-law and 
her numerous sisters-in-law to the fields of the headman of the 
village, where with other women and girls she laboured as 
many hours as her husband for half the wage he received. 

When the day's work was done the family walked back in the 
twilight to the hut Harkwar's father had been permitted to 
build on the headman's land, and with the dry sticks the 
younger children had collected during their elders' absence, 
the evening meal was cooked and eaten. Except for the fire, 
there had never been any other form of illumination in the hut, 
and when the pots and pans had been cleaned and put away, 
each member of the family retired to his or her allotted place, 
Harkwar and his brothers sleeping with their father and Kunthi 
sleeping with the other female members of the family. 

When Harkwar was eighteen and Kunthi sixteen, they left and, 
carrying their few possessions, set up home in a hut placed at 



their disposal by an uncle of Harkwar's in a village three miles 
from the cantonment of Ranikhet. A number of barracks were 
under construction in the cantonment and Harkwar had no 
difficulty in finding work as a mason; nor had Kunthi any 
difficulty in finding work as a labourer, carrying stones from a 
quarry to the site of the building. For four years the young 
couple worked on the barracks at Ranikhet, and during this 
period Kunthi had two children. In November of the fourth year 
the buildings were completed and Harkwar and Kunthi had to 
find new work, for their savings were small and would only 
keep them in food for a few days. 

Winter set in early that year and promised to be unusually 
severe. The family had no warm clothes, and after a week's 
unsuccessful search for work Harkwar suggested that they 
should migrate to the foothills where he heard a canal 
headworks was being constructed. 

So, early in December, the family set out in high spirits on their 
long walk to the foothills. The distance between the village in 
which they had made their home for four years and the canal 
headworks at Kaladhungi, where they hoped to procure work, 
was roughly fifty miles. 

Sleeping under trees at night, toiling up and down steep and 
rough roads during the day, and carrying all their worldly 
possessions and the children by turns, Harkwar and Kunthi, 
tired and footsore, accomplished the journey to Kaladhungi in 
six days. 

Other landless members of the depressed class had migrated 
earlier in the winter from the high hills to the foothills and built 
themselves communal huts capable of housing as many as 
thirty families. In these huts Harkwar and Kunthi were unable 
to find accommodation, so they had to build a hut for 
themselves. They chose a site at the edge of the forest where 
there was an abundant supply of fuel, within easy reach of the 
bazaar, and laboured early and late on a small hut of branches 
and leaves, for their supply of hard cash had dwindled to a few 



rupees and there was no friendly bania here to whom they 
could turn for help. 

The forest at the edge of which Harkwar and Kunthi built their 
hut was a favourite hunting-ground of mine. I had first entered 
it carrying my old muzzle-loader to shoot red jungle fowl and 
pea fowl for the family larder, and later I had penetrated to 
every corner, armed with a modern rifle, in search of big game. 
At the time Harkwar and Kunthi and their two children, Punwa, 
a boy aged three, and Putali, a girl aged two, took up their 
residence in the hut, there were in that forest, to my certain 
knowledge, five tigers; eight leopards; a family of four sloth 
bears; two Himalayan black bears, which had come down from 
the high hills to feed on wild plums and honey; a number of 
hyenas who had their burrows in the grasslands five miles 
away and who visited the forest nightly to feed on the 
discarded portions of the tigers' and leopards' kills; a pair of 
wild dogs; numerous jackals and foxes and pine martens; and a 
variety of civet and other cats. 

There were also two pythons, many kinds of snakes, crested 
and tawny eagles, and hundreds of vultures in the forest. I have 
not mentioned animals such as deer, antelope, pigs, and 
monkeys, which are harmless to human beings, for they have 
no part in my story. 

The day after the flimsy hut was completed, Harkwar found 
work as a qualified mason on a daily wage of eight annas with 
the contractor who was building the canal headworks, and 
Kunthi purchased for two rupees a permit from the Forest 
Department which entitled her to cut grass on the foothills, 
which she sold as fodder for the cattle of the shopkeepers in 
the bazaar. For her bundle of green grass weighing anything up 
to eighty pounds and which necessitated a walk of from ten to 
fourteen miles, mostly up and down steep hills, Kunthi received 
four annas, one anna of which was taken by the man who held 
the Government contract for sale of grass in the bazaar. On the 
eight annas earned by Harkwar, plus the three annas earned by 



Kunthi, the family of four lived in comparative comfort, for food 
was plentiful and cheap and for the first time in their lives they 
were able to afford one meat meal a month. 

Two of the three months that Harkwar and Kunthi intended 
spending in Kaladhungi passed very peacefully The hours of 
work were long, and admitted of no relaxation, but to that they 
had been accustomed from childhood. The weather was 
perfect, the children kept in good health, and except during the 
first few days while the hut was being built they had never 
gone hungry. 

The children had in the beginning been an anxiety, for they 
were too young to accompany Harkwar to the canal head 
works, or Kunthi on her long journeys in search of grass. Then 
a kindly old crippled woman living in the communal hut a few 
hundred yards away came to the rescue by offering to keep a 
general eye on the children while the parents were away at 
work. This arrangement worked satisfactorily for two months, 
and each evening when Harkwar returned from the canal 
headworks four miles away, and Kunthi returned a little later 
after selling her grass in the bazaar, they found Punwa and 
Putali eagerly awaiting their return. Friday was fair day in 
Kaladhungi and on that day everyone in the surrounding 
villages made it a point to visit the bazaar, where open booths 
were erected for the display of cheap food, fruit, and 
vegetables. On these fair days Harkwar and Kunthi returned 
from work half an hour before their usual time, for if any 
vegetables had been left over it was possible to buy them at a 
reduced price before the booths closed down for the night. 

One particular Friday, when Harkwar and Kunthi returned to 
the hut after making their modest purchases of vegetables and 
a pound of goat's meat, Punwa and Putali were not at the hut to 
welcome them. On making inquiries from the crippled woman 
at the communal hut, they learned that she had not seen the 
children since midday. The woman suggested that they had 
probably gone to the bazaar to see a merry- go-round that had 



attracted all the children from the communal hut, and as this 
seemed a reasonable explanation Harkwar set off to search the 
bazaar while Kunthi returned to the hut to prepare the evening 
meal. An hour later Harkwar returned with several men who 
had assisted him in his search to report that no trace of the 
children could be found, and that of all the people he had 
questioned, none admitted having seen them. 

At that time a rumour was running through the length and 
breadth of India of the kidnapping of Hindu children by fakirs, 
for sale on the north-west frontier for immoral purposes. 

What truth there was in this rumour I am unable to say, but I 
had frequently read in the daily press of fakirs being man 
handled, and on several occasions being rescued by the police 
from crowds intent on lynching them. It is safe to say that 
every parent in India had heard these rumours, and when 
Harkwar and the friends who had helped him in his search 
returned to the hut, they communicated their fears to Kunthi 
that the children had been kidnapped by fakirs, who had 
probably come to the fair for that purpose. At the lower end of 
the village there was a police station in charge of a head 
constable and two constables. To this police station Harkwar 
and Kunthi repaired, with a growing crowd of well-wishers. The 
head constable was a kindly old man who had children of his 
own, and after lie had listened sympathetically to the distracted 
parents' story, and recorded their statements in his diary, he 
said -that nothing could be done that night, but that next 
morning he would send the town crier round to all the fifteen 
villages in Kaladhungi to announce the loss of the children. He 
then suggested that if the town crier could announce a reward 
of fifty rupees, it would greatly assist in the safe return of the 
children. Fifty rupees! Harkwar and Kunthi were aghast at the 
suggestion, for they did not know there was so much money in 
all the world. However when the town crier set out on his 
round the following morning, he was able to announce the 
reward, for a man in Kaladhungi who had heard of the head 
constable's suggestion had offered the money. The evening 



meal was eaten late that night. The childrens' portion was laid 
aside, and through out the night a small fire was kept burning, 
for it was bitterly cold, and at short intervals Harkwar and 
Kunthi went out into the night to call to their children, though 
they knew there was no hope of receiving an answer. 

At Kaladhungi two roads cross each other at right angles, one 
running along the foot of the hills from Haldwani to Ramnagar, 
and the other running from Naini Tal to Bazpur. During that 
Friday night, sitting close to the small fire to keep themselves 
warm, Harkwar and Kunthi decided that if the children did not 
turn up by morning, they would go along the former road and 
make inquiries, as this was the most likely route for the 
kidnappers to have taken. At day break on Saturday morning 
they went to the police station to tell the head constable of 
their decision, and were instructed to lodge a report at the 
Haldwani and Ramnagar police stations. They were greatly 
heartened when the head constable told them that he was 
sending a letter by mail runner to no less a person than the 
Inspector of Police at Haldwani, requesting him to telegraph to 
all railway junctions to keep a look-out for the children, a 
description of whom he was sending with his letter. 

Near sunset that evening Kunthi returned from her twenty- 
eight-mile walk to Haldwani and went straight to the police 
station to inquire about her children and to tell the head 
constable that, though her quest had been fruitless, she had 
lodged a report as instructed at the Haldwani police station. 
Shortly afterwards Harkwar returned from his thirty-six-mile 
walk to Ramnagar, and he too went straight to the police 
station to make inquiries and to report that he had found no 
trace of the children, but had carried out the head constable's 
instructions. Many friends, including a number of mothers who 
feared for the safety of their own children, were waiting at the 
hut to express their sympathy for Harkwar and for Punwa's 
mother— for, as is the custom in India, Kunthi when she 
married lost the name she had been given at birth, and until 
Punwa was born had been addressed and referred to as 



'Harkwar's wife', and after Punwa's birth as 'Punwa's mother. 

Sunday was a repetition of Saturday with the difference that 
instead of going east and west, Kunthi went north to Naini Tal 
while Harkwar went south to Bazpur. The former covered thirty 
miles, and the latter thirty-two. Starting early and returning at 
nightfall, the distracted parents traversed many miles of rough 
roads through dense forests, where people do not usually go 
except in large parties, and where Harkwar and Kunthi would 
not have dreamed of going alone had not anxiety for their 
children overcome their fear of dacoits and of wild animals. 

On that Sunday evening, weary and hungry, they returned to 
their hut from their fruitless visit to Naini Tal and to Bazpur, to 
be met by the news that the town crier's visit to the villages 
and the police inquiries had failed to find any trace of the 
children. Then they lost heart and gave up all hope of ever 
seeing Punwa and Putali again. The anger of the gods, that had 
resulted in a fakir being able to steal their children in broad 
daylight, was not to be explained. Before starting on their long 
walk from the hills-they had consulted the village priest, and he 
had selected the propitious day for them to set out on their 
journey. At every shrine they had passed they had made the 
requisite offering; at one place, a dry bit of wood, in another a 
small strip of cloth torn from the hem of Kunthi's chaddar, and 
in yet another a pice, which they could ill afford. And here, at 
Kaladhungi, every time they passed the temple that their low 
caste did not permit them to enter; they had never failed to 
raise their clasped hands in supplication. Why then had this 
great misfortune befallen them, who had done all that the gods 
demanded of them and who had never wronged any man? 

Monday found the pair too dispirited and too tired to leave 
their hut. There was no food, and would be none until they 
resumed work. But of what use was it to work now, when the 
children for whom they had ungrudgingly laboured from morn 
to night were gone? So, while friends came and went, offering 
what sympathy they could, Hark-war sat at the door of the hut 



staring into a bleak and hopeless future, while Kunthi, her 
tears all gone, sat in a corner, hour after hour, rocking herself 
to and fro, to and fro. 

On that Monday a man of my acquaintance was herding 
buffaloes in the jungle in which lived the wild animals and birds 
I have mentioned. He was a simple soul who had spent the 
greater part of his life in the jungles herding the buffaloes of 
the headman at Patabpur village. He knew the danger from 
tigers, and near sundown he collected the buffaloes and started 
to drive them to the village, along a cattle track that ran 
through the densest part of the jungle. Presently he noticed 
that as each buffalo got to a certain spot in the track it turned 
its head to the right and stopped, until urged on by the horns of 
the animal following. When he got to this spot he also turned 
his head to the right, and in a little depression a few feet from 
the track saw two small children lying. 

Man had been in the jungle with his buffaloes when the town 
crier had made his round of the villages on Saturday, but that 
night, and the following night also, the kidnapping of 
Harkwar's children had been the topic of conversation round 
the village fire, as in fact it had been round every village fire in 
the whole of Kaladhungi. Here then were the missing children 
for whom a reward of fifty rupees had been offered. 

But why had they been murdered and brought to this remote 
spot? The children were naked, and were clasped in each 
other's arms. The herdsman descended into the depression and 
squatted down on his hunkers to determine, if he could, how 
the children had met their death. That the children were dead 
he was convinced, yet now as he sat closely scrutinizing them 
he suddenly saw that they were breathing; that in fact they 
were not dead, but sound asleep. He was a father himself, and 
very gently he touched the children and roused them. To touch 
them was a crime against his caste, for he was a Brahmin and 
they were low-caste children, but what mattered caste in an 
emergency like this? So, leaving his buffaloes to find their own 



way home, he picked up the children, who were too weak to 
walk, and set out for the Kaladhungi bazaar with one on each 
shoulder. The man was not too strong himself, for like all who 
live in the foothills he had suffered much from malaria. 

The children were an awkward load and had to be held in 
position. Moreover, as all the cattle tracks and game paths in 
this jungle run from north to south, and his way lay from east 
to west, he had to make frequent detours to avoid impenetrable 
thickets and deep ravines. But he carried on manfully, resting 
every now and then in the course of his six-mile walk. Putali 
was beyond speech, but Punwa was able to talk a little and all 
the explanation he could give for their being in the jungle was 
that they had been playing and had got lost. 

Harkwar was sitting at the door of his hut staring into the 
darkening night, in which points of light were beginning to 
appear as a lantern or cooking-fire was lit here and there, when 
he saw a small crowd of people appearing from the direction of 
the bazaar. At the head of the procession a man was walking, 
carrying something on his shoulders. From all sides people 
were converging on the procession and he could hear an 
excited murmur of 'Harkwar's children'. Harkwar's children. 

He could not believe his ears, and yet there appeared to be no 
mistake, for the procession was coming straight towards his 
hut. 

Kunthi, having reached the limit of her misery and of her 
physical endurance, had fallen asleep curled up in a corner of 
the hut. Harkwar shook her awake and got her to the door just 
as the herdsman carrying Punwa and Putali reached it. When 
the tearful greetings, and blessings and thanks for the rescuer, 
and the congratulations of friends had partly subsided, the 
question of the reward the herdsman had earned was mooted. 
To a poor man fifty rupees was wealth, untold, and with it the 
herdsman could buy three buffaloes or ten cows, and be 
independent for life. But the rescuer was a better man than the 
crowd gave him credit for. The blessings and thanks that had 



been showered on his head that night, he said, was reward 
enough for him, and he stoutly refused to touch one pice of the 
fifty rupees. Nor would Harkwar or Kunthi accept the reward 
either as a gift or a loan. They had got back the children they 
had lost all hope of ever seeing again, and would resume work 
as their strength returned. In the meantime the milk and 
sweets and puris that one and another of the assembled people, 
out of the goodness of their hearts, had run to the bazaar to 
fetch would be amply sufficient to sustain them. 

Two-year-old Putali and three-year-old Punwa were lost at 
midday on Friday, and were found by the herdsman at about 5 
p.m. on Monday, a matter of seventy-seven hours. I have given 
a description of the wild life which to my knowledge was in the 
forest in which the children spent those seventy-seven hours, 
and it would be unreasonable to assume that none of the 
animals or birds saw, heard, or smelt the children. And yet, 
when the herdsman put Putali and Punwa into their parents' 
arms, there was not a single mark of tooth or claw on them. I 
once saw a tigress stalking a month-old kid. The ground was 
very open and the kid saw the tigress while she was still some 
distance away and started bleating, where on the tigress gave 
up her stalk and walked straight up to it. When the tigress had 
approached to within a few yards, the kid went forward to meet 
her, and on reaching the tigress stretched out its neck and put 
up its head to smell her. For the duration of a few heart beats 
the month-old kid and the Queen of the Forest stood nose to 
nose, and 'then the queen turned and walked off in the 
direction from which she had come. 

Illustration from the 1952 Readers Digest condensed printing 
of the chapter 'Law of the Jungle' from My India. 

When Hitler's war was nearing its end, in one week I read 
extracts from speeches of three of the greatest men in the 
British Empire, condemning war atrocities, and accusing the 
enemy of attempting to introduce the 'law of the jungle 1 into 
the dealings of warring man and man. Had the Creator made 



the same law for man as He has made for the jungle folk, there 
would be no wars, for the strong in man would have the same 
consideration for the weak as is the established law of the 
jungles. 



VI - The Brothers 

THE long years of training boys for jungle warfare were over, 
and we were sitting one morning after breakfast on the 
veranda of our cottage at Kaladhungi. My sister Maggie was 
knitting a khaki pullover for me, and I was putting the finishing 
touches to a favourite fly-rod that suffered from years of disuse, 
when a man wearing a clean but much-patched cotton suit 
walked up the steps of the veranda with a broad grin on his 
face, salaamed, and asked if we remembered him. 

Many people, clean and not so clean, old and young, rich and 
poor (but mostly poor), Hindus, Mohammedans, and Christians, 
walked up those steps, for our cottage was at a cross-roads at 
the foot of the hills and on the border line between the 
cultivated land and the forest. All who were sick or sorry, in 
want of a helping hand, or in need of a little human 
companionship and a cup of tea, whether living on the 
cultivated land or working in the forest or just passing on their 
way from one place to another, found their way to our cottage. 
Had a record been maintained over the years of only the sick 
and injured treated, it would have had thousands of names in 
it. And the cases dealt with would have covered every ailment 
that human flesh is heir to— and subject to, when living in an 
unhealthy area, working in forests on dangerous jobs among 
animals who occasionally lose their tempers. 

There was the case of the woman who came one morning and 
complained that her son had great difficulty in eating the 
linseed poultice that had been given to her the previous 
evening to apply on a boil: as the poultice did not appear to 
have done the boy any good, she asked to have the medicine 
changed. And the case of the old Mohammedan woman who 
came late one evening, with tears streaming down her face, 
and begged Maggie to save her husband who was dying of 
pneumonia. She looked a glance at the tablets of M. & B. 693 
and asked if that was all that was to be given to a dying man to 
make him well; but next day she returned with a beaming 



countenance to report that her husband had recovered, and 
begged for the same kind of medicine for the four friends she 
had brought with her, each of whom had husbands as old as 
hers who might at any time get pneumonia. And there was the 
case of the girl about eight years old, who, after some difficulty 
in reaching the latch of the gate, marched up to the veranda 
firmly holding the hand of a boy some two years younger, and 
asked for medicine for the boy's sore eyes. She sat herself 
down on the ground, made the boy lie on his back, and having 
got his head between her knees said, 'Now, Miss Sahib, you can 
do anything you like to him.' This girl was the daughter of the 
headman of a village six miles away. Seeing her class mate 
suffering from sore eyes, she had taken it upon herself to bring 
him to Maggie for treatment, and for a whole week, until his 
eyes were quite well, the young Samaritan brought the boy to 
the cottage, though in order to do so she had to walk an 
additional four miles each day. Then there was the case of the 
sawyer from Delhi, who limped into the compound one day with 
his right leg ripped open by the tusk of a pig from his heel to 
the back of his knee. All the time his leg was being attended to 
he swore at the unclean beast that had done this terrible thing 
to him, for he was a follower of the Prophet. His story was that 
when that morning he had approached the tree he had felled 
the previous day, to saw it up, a pig which had been sheltering 
among the branches ran against him and cut his leg. When I 
suggested that it was his own fault for having got in the way of 
the pig, he indignantly exclaimed: 'With the whole jungle to run 
about in, what need was there for it to have run against me 
when I had done nothing, to offend it, and in fact before I had 
even seen it?' 

There was another sawyer too. While turning over a log he had 
been stung on the palm of his hand by a scorpion 'as big as 
this'. After treatment, he rolled on the ground loudly lamenting 
his fate and asserting that the medicine was doing him no 
good, but not long after he was observed to be holding his sides 
and choking with laughter. It was the day of the children's 



annual fete, and when the races had been run and the two 
hundred children and their mothers had been fed on sweets 
and fruit, a circle had been formed. A blindfolded boy had been 
set to break a paper bag containing nuts of all kinds, which was 
slung between two bamboos held upright by two men; and it 
was when the boy brought his stick down on the head of one of 
these men that the scorpion patient was found to be laughing 
the loudest of all the assembly When asked how the pain now 
was, the man replied that it had gone, and that in any case he 
would not mind how many scorpions stung him provided he 
could take part in a tamasha like this. 

The members of our family have been amateur physicians for 
more years than I can remember, and as Indians, especially the 
poorer ones, have long memories, and never forget a kindness 
no matter how trivial it may have been, not all the people who 
walked up the steps of our cottage at Kaladhungi were 
patients. Many there were who had marched for days over 
rough tracks in all weathers to thank us for small kindnesses 
shown to them, maybe the previous year, or maybe many years 
previously. 

One of these was a sixteen-year-old boy, who with his mother 
had been housed for some days in our village while Maggie 
treated his mother for influenza and badly inflamed eyes; now 
he had done a march of many days to bring Maggie his 
mother's thanks and a present of a few pomegranates which his 
mother had picked for her 'with her own hand '. And only that 
day, an hour before the man wearing the patched suit had 
arrived, an old man had walked up the steps and seated himself 
on the veranda with his back to one of the pillars and, after 
looking at me for some time, had shaken his head in a 
disapproving manner and said, 'You are looking much older. 
Sahib, than you were when I last saw you.' 'Yes', I replied, 'all 
of us are apt to look older after ten years.' 'Not all of us. Sahib,' 
he rejoined, 'for I look and feel no older than when I last sat in 
your veranda not ten, but twelve years ago. On that occasion I 
was returning on foot from a pilgrimage to Badrinath, and 



seeing your gate open, and being tired and in urgent need of 
ten rupees, I asked you to let me rest for a while, and appealed 
to you for help. I am now returning from another pilgrimage, 
this time to the sacred city of Benares. I am in no need of 
money and have only come to thank you for the help you gave 
me before and to tell you that I got home safely. After this 
smoke, and a little rest, I shall return to rejoin my family, whom 
I left at Haldwani. 1 A fourteen-mile walk each way. And in spite 
of his assertion that twelve years had not made him look or feel 
any older, he was a frail old man. 

Though the face of the man in the patched cotton suit who now 
stood before us on the veranda was vaguely familiar, we could 
not remember his name or the circumstances in which we had 
last seen him. Seeing that he was not recognized, the man 
removed his coat, opened his shirt, and exposed his chest and 
right shoulder. That shoulder brought him to instant memory. 
He was Narwa. Narwa the basket-maker, and there was some 
excuse for our not having recognized him, for when we had last 
seen him, six years previously, he was mere skin and bone; only 
with great difficulty had he been able to put one foot before 
another, and he had needed a stick to support himself. Looking 
now at his misshapen shoulder, the crushed and broken bones 
of which had calloused without being set, the puckered and 
discoloured skin of his chest and back, and his partially 
withered right arm, we who for three months had watched his 
gallant fight for life marvelled how well he had survived his 
ordeal. Moving his arm up and down, and closing and opening 
his hand, Narwa said that his arm was getting stronger every 
day. His fingers had not got stiff, as we feared they would, so 
he had been able to resume his trade. His object now, he said, 
was to show us that he was quite well and to thank Maggie — 
which he proceeded to do by putting his head on her feet— for 
having supplied all his wants, and the wants of his wife and 
child, during the months he had lain between life and death. 

Narwa and Haria were not blood brothers, though they so 
described themselves. They had been born and had grown up 



in the same village near Almora, and when old enough to work 
had adopted the same profession, basket-making— which 
means that they wereuntouchables, for in the United Provinces 
baskets are only made by untouchables. During the summer 
months Narwa and Haria worked at their trade in their village 
near Almora, and in the winter months they came down to 
Kaladhungi where there was a great demand for the huge 
baskets, measuring up to fifteen feet in diameter, which they 
made for our villagers for the storage of grain. In their hill 
village near Almora they made their baskets of ringals— thin 
bamboo an inch thick and up to twenty feet long, which grows 
at an altitude of four to ten thousand feet, and which 
incidentally makes the most perfect of fly- rods — and in 
Kaladhungi they made them of bamboos. 

The bamboos in Kaladhungi grow in the Government Reserved 
Forests, and we who cultivate land near the Reserved Forests 
are permitted to cut a certain number each year for our 
personal use. But people who use the bamboos for commercial 
purposes have to take out a licence from the forest guard of the 
area, paying two annas per headload, and a small consideration 
to the forest guard for his trouble in filling in the licence. As 
the licence is a personal one and covers an individual headload 
it is safe to assume that as many lengths of two-year-old 
bamboos— the age when a bamboo is best for basket-making— 
were included in the load as a man could carry. 

At daybreak on the morning of 26 December 1939 Narwa and 
Haria set out from their communal hut near the bazaar at 
Kaladhungi to walk eight miles to Nalni village, obtain a licence 
from the forest guard, cut two headloads of bamboos in the 
Nalni Reserved Forests, and return to Kaladhungi the same 
evening. It was bitterly cold when they started, so the two men 
wrapped coarse cotton sheets round their shoulders to keep 
out the cold. For a mile their way ran along the canal bank. 
Then, after negotiating the series of high walls which form the 
headworks of the canal, they took a footpath which runs 
alternately through patches of dense scrub jungle and over 



long stretches of the boulder-strewn bank of the Boar river, 
stretches where a pair of otters are usually to be seen in the 
early morning, and where, when the sun is on the water, 
mahseer up to three or four pounds can be taken on a fly-rod. 
Two miles up they crossed by a shallow ford from the right to 
the left bank of the river and entered a tree and grass jungle, 
where morning and evening are to be seen several small herds 
of chital and sambhar, and an occasional kakar, leopard, or 
tiger. A mile through this jungle, they came to where the hills 
converge, and where some years previously Robin picked up 
the tracks of the Bachelor of Powalgarh. From this point 
onwards the valley opens out and is known to all who graze 
cattle, or who poach or shoot in the area, as Samal Chour. In 
this valley one has to walk warily, for the footpath is used 
almost as much by tigers as it is by human beings. 

At the upper end of the valley the footpath, before going 
steeply up the hill for two miles to Nalni village, passes through 
a strip of grass. This strip of eight-foot grass is thirty yards 
wide and extends for about fifty yards on either side of the 
path. In anticipation of the stiff climb up the Nalni hill, shortly 
before reaching the grass Narwa divested himself of his cotton 
sheet, folded it small and placed it on his right shoulder. Haria 
was leading, with Narwa following a few steps behind, and he 
had only gone three or four yards into the grass when he heard 
the angry roar of a tiger, and simultaneously a shriek from 
Narwa. Haria turned and dashed back, and on the open ground 
at the edge of the grass he saw Narwa on his back with a tiger 
lying diagonally across him. Narwa's feet were nearest to him, 
and grasping an ankle in each hand he started to pull him away 
from under the tiger. As he did this the tiger stood up, turned 
towards him and started to growl. After dragging Narwa along 
on his back for a short distance Haria got his arms round him 
and set him on his feet. But Narwa was too badly injured and 
shaken to stand or walk, so Haria put his arms round him, and 
alternately dragged and carried him— while the tiger 
continued to growl— through the open ground skirting the 



grass, and so regained the path to Nalni village. By 
superhuman efforts Haria eventually got Narwa to Nalni, 
where it was found that in spite of the folded sheet which he 
had been carrying on his right shoulder, and which Haria had 
retrieved while pulling him away, the tiger had crushed the 
bones of the shoulder, lacerated the flesh, and exposed the 
bones on the right side of the chest and back. All four of the 
tiger's canine teeth had penetrated some eight folds of the 
sheet, and but for this obstruction they would have met in 
Narwa's chest and inflicted a fatal wound. The forest guard and 
the people of Nalni were unable to do anything for Narwa, so 
Haria hired a pack pony for two rupees, mounted Narwa on it, 
and set out for Kaladhungi. The distance, as I have already 
said, was eight miles, but Haria was unwilling to face the tiger 
a second time so he made a wide detour through Musabanga 
village, adding ten miles to Narwa's agonizing journey. There 
were no saddles at Nalni and he had been mounted on a hard 
pack used for carrying grain, and the first nine miles of his ride 
was over incredibly steep and rough ground. 

Maggie was having tea on the veranda of our cottage when 
Narwa, soaked in blood and being held on the pony by Haria, 
arrived at the steps. A glance was enough to show that the case 
was one she could not deal with, so she quickly gave Narwa a 
stiff dose of sal volatile— for he was on the point of fainting— 
and made a sling for his arm. Then she tore up a bed sheet to 
be used for bandages and wrote a note to the Assistant 
Surgeon in charge of the Kaladhungi hospital, begging him to 
attend to Narwa immediately, and do all he could for him. She 
gave the note to our head boy and sent him to the hospital with 
the two men. 

I was out bird shooting that day with a party of friends who 
were spending their Christmas holiday at Kaladhungi, and 
when I returned in the late evening Maggie told me about 
Narwa. Early next morning I was at the hospital, where I was 
informed by a very young and very inexperienced doctor that 
he had done all he could for Narwa, but as he had little hope of 



his recovery, and no arrangements for in-patients, he had sent 
Narwa home after treating him. 

In the large communal hut, which housed about twenty 
families, each of which appeared to have a record number of 
small children, I found Narwa lying in a corner on a bed of 
straw and leaves. It was the last place for a man in his terrible 
condition to be in, for his wounds were showing signs of 
getting septic. For a week Narwa lay in the corner of the noisy 
and insanitary hut, at times raving in high fever, at times in a 
state of coma, watched over by his weeping wife, and his 
devoted 'brother' Haria, and by other friends. It was now 
apparent, even to my inexperienced eyes, that if Narwa's septic 
wounds were not opened up, drained, and cleaned, there was a 
certainty of the doctor's predictions being fulfilled, so, after 
making arrangements for his care while under treatment, I 
removed him to the hospital. To give the young doctor credit, 
when he undertook to do job he did it thoroughly, and many of 
the long scars on his chest and back that Narwa will carry to 
the burning-ghat were made not by the tiger but by the 
doctor's lancet, which he used very freely. 

With the exception of professional beggars, the poor in India 
can only eat when they work, and as Narwa's wife's days were 
fully occupied in visiting him at the hospital, and later in 
nursing him when he returned to the communal hut, and in 
caring for her three-year-old girl and her young baby, Maggie 
supplied all Narwa's wants, and the wants of his family (Small 
hospitals in India do not provide either attendants or food for 
patients.). Three months later, reduced to skin and bone and 
with a right arm that looked as though it could never be used 
again, Narwa crawled from the hut to our cottage to bid us 
goodbye and the next day he and Haria and their families set 
out for their village near Almora. 

After visiting Narwa in the communal hut that first morning, 
and getting a firsthand account of the incident from Haria, I 
was convinced that the tiger's encounter with Narwa was 



accidental. However, to satisfy myself that my reconstruction of 
the event was right— and to shoot the tiger if I was wrong— I 
followed, foot by foot, the track the brothers had taken the 
previous day when on their way to Nalni village. For a few 
yards the track runs along the edge of the strip of high grass at 
the foot of the Nalni hill, before turning at right angles to cross 
the grass. Shortly before the two men arrived at this spot, the 
tiger had killed a sambhar stag and carried it into the grass 
close to the right-hand side of the track. When Haria entered 
the grass the tiger heard the rustling, and coming out, ran into 
Narwa, who was a few yards behind Haria and a yard or two 
from the turning. The encounter was accidental, for the grass 
was too thick and too high for the tiger to have seen Narwa 
before he bumped into him. Furthermore it had made no 
attempt to savage Narwa, and had even allowed Haria to drag 
the man on whom it was lying away from under it. So the tiger 
was allowed to live, and was later induced to join the party of 
tigers that are mentioned in the chapter 'Just Tigers' in Man- 
eaters of Kumaon. 

Of all the brave deeds that I have witnessed, or that I have read 
or heard about, I count Haria's rescue of Narwa the greatest. 
Unarmed and alone in a great expanse of jungle, to respond to 
the cry of a companion in distress and to pull that companion 
away from an angry tiger that was lying on him, and then to 
drag and carry that companion for two miles up a steep hill to a 
place of safety, not knowing but that the tiger was following, 
needed a degree of courage that is given to few, and that any 
man could envy. When I took down Haria's statement— which 
was later corroborated in every detail by Narwa— with the 
object, unknown to him, of his act receiving recognition, so far 
from thinking that he had done anything deserving of 
commendation, after I had finished questioning him he said: 'I 
have not done anything. Sahib, have I, that is likely to bring 
trouble on me or on my brother Narwa?' 

And Narwa, a few days later, when I took down what I feared 
would be his dying declaration, said in avoice racked with pain 



and little above a whisper, 'Don't let my brother get into any 
trouble. Sahib, for it was not his fault that the tiger attacked 
me, and he risked his life to save mine'. I should have liked to 
have been able to end my story by telling you that Haria's 
brave act, and Narwa'sheroic fight for life against great odds, 
had been acknowledged by a certificate of merit, or some other 
small token of award, for both were poor men. Unfortunately 
red tape proved too much for me, for the Government was not 
willing to make any award in a case of which the truth could 
not be sworn to by independent and unbiased witnesses. 

So one of the bravest deeds ever performed has gone 
unrecognized because there were no 'independent and 
unbiased witnesses'; and of the brothers Haria is the poorer of 
the two, for he has nothing to show for the part he played, 
while Narwa has his scars and the sheet with many holes, 
stained with his blood. 

For many days I toyed with the idea of appealing to His Majesty 
the King, but with a world war starting and all it implied I very 
reluctantly abandoned the idea. 



VII - Sultana: India's Robin Hood 

IN a country as vast as India, with its great areas of forest land 
and bad communications, and with its teeming population 
chronically on the verge of starvation, it is easy to understand 
the temptations to embark on a life of crime, and the difficulty 
the Government have in rounding up criminals. In addition to 
the ordinary criminals to be found in all countries, there are in 
India whole tribes classed as criminals who are segregated in 
settlements set apart for them by the Government and 
subjected to a greater or lesser degree of restraint according to 
the crimes they specialize in. While I was engaged on welfare 
work during a part of the last war, I frequently visited one of 
these criminal settlements. The inmates were not kept under 
close restraint, and I had many interesting talks with them and 
with the Government representative in charge of the 
settlement. In an effort to wean this tribe from a life of crime 
the Government had given them, free of rent, a large tract of 
alluvial land on the left bank of the Jumna river in the Meerut 
District. This rich land produced bumper crops of sugarcane, 
wheat, barley, rape seed, and other cereals, but crime 
persisted. The Government representative blamed the girls, 
who, he said, refused to marry any but successful criminals. 

The tribe specialized in robbery, and there were old men in the 
settlement who trained the younger generation on a profit- 
sharing basis. 

Men were allowed to leave the settlement on ticket of leave for 
stated periods, but women were not permitted to leave. The 
elders of the tribe strictly enforced three rules: first, that all 
robberies were to be carried out single-handed ; second, that 
the scene of the crime was to be as distant from the settlement 
as possible; and third, that violence while committing the crime 
was not to be resorted to in any circumstances. 

The method invariably adopted by a young man, after he had 
completed his training, was to secure employment as a house 
servant with a rich man in Calcutta, Bombay, or some other 



distant city, and when opportunity offered to rob his master of 
articles which could be easily secreted, such as gold, jewellery, 
or precious stones. On one occasion while I was paying a 
number of young men who had been driving black partridge 
out of a sugarcane field for me, the Government representative 
informed me that the young man into whose hands I had just 
dropped his wage of eight annas, plus two annas for a runner 
he had retrieved, had returned to the settlement a few days 
previously, after an absence of a year, with a diamond worth 
thirty thousand rupees. 

After valuation by the experts of the tribe the diamond had 
been hidden, and the most sought-after girl in the settlement 
had promised to marry the successful criminal during the next 
marriage season. Another of the men standing near by, who 
had not taken part in the partridge drive, had conceived the 
novel plan of impressing the girl of his choice by driving up to 
the settlement, along a most appalling cart-track, in a new 
motor-car he had stolen in Calcutta. In order to carry out his 
plan he had first had to pay for driving lessons. Some members 
of criminal tribes who are not subjected to strict control find 
employment as night watch men in private houses, and I know 
of instances where it was a sufficient guarantee against theft 
for the watchman to place a pair of his shoes on the door step 
of the house in which he was employed. This may savour of 
blackmail, but it was cheap blackmail, for the wages paid 
varied from three to five rupees a month, according to the 
standing of the criminal, and the money was easily earned as 
all the watchman had to do was to place his shoes in position at 
night, and remove them again the next morning. Owing to their 
preference for violent crime the Bhantus were one of the 
criminal tribes in the United Provinces that were kept under 
strict restraint, and Sultana, the famous dacoit who for three 
years defied all the Government's efforts to capture him, was a 
member of this tribe. It is about Sultana that this story is 
written. 


When I first knew it, Naya Gaon was one of the most 



nourishing villages in the Terai and Bhabar— the tract of land 
running along the foothills of the Himalayas. Every yard of the 
rich soil, carved out of virgin forest, was under intensive 
cultivation, and the hundred or more tenants were prosperous, 
contented, and happy Sir Henry Ramsay, the King of Kumaon, 
had brought these hardy people down from the Himalayas, and 
for a generation they retained their vigour and flourished 
exceedingly 

Malaria at that time was known as 'Bhabar fever', and the few 
doctors, scattered over a wide area, who were responsible for 
the health of the people, had neither the ability nor the means 
to cope with this scourge of the foothills. Naya Gaon, situated 
in the heart of the forest, was one of the first villages in the 
Bhabar to be decimated by the disease. Field after field went 
out of cultivation as the tenants died, until only a handful of the 
sturdy pioneers were left, and when these survivors were given 
land in our village Naya Gaon reverted to jungle. 

Only once in later years was an attempt made to recultivate the 
land, the intrepid pioneer on this occasion being a doctor from 
the Punjab; but when first his daughter, then his wife, and 
finally he himself died of malaria, Naya Gaon for the second 
time went back to the jungle. 

On the land which had been cleared with great labour, on 
which bumper crops of sugarcane, wheat, mustard, and rice 
had been grown, luxuriant grass sprang up. Attracted by this 
rich feed, the cattle from our village three miles away adopted 
the deserted fields of Naya Gaon as their regular feeding 
ground. When cattle graze for long periods over open ground 
surrounded by jungle they invariably attract carnivora, and I 
was not surprised to hear one year, on our descent from our 
summer home in Naini Tal to our winter home in Kaladhungi, 
that a leopard had taken up residence in the jungles adjoining 
the grazing-ground and that he was taking heavy toll of our 
cattle. There were no trees on the grassland in which I could sit 
over a kill, so I determined to shoot the leopard either in the 



early morning, when he was on his way to lie up in thick cover 
for the day or in the evening, when he was returning to a kill 
or intent on making a fresh one. For either of these plans to be 
effective it was necessary to discover in what part of the 
surrounding jungles the leopard had made his home, so early 
one morning Robin and I set out to glean this information. 

Naya Gaon— for though the land has been out of cultivation for 
many years it retains its name to this day— is bounded on the 
north by the road known as the Kandi Sarak, and on the east by 
the old Trunk Road which before the advent of railways 
connected the plains of the United Provinces with the interior 
of Kumaon. 

To the south and west, Naya Gaon is bounded by dense jungle. 
Both the Kandi Sarak and the Trunk Road are little used in 
these days and I decided to try them first before trying the 
more difficult ground to the south and west. At the junction of 
the roads, where in the days gone by a police guard was posted 
for the protection of wayfarers against dacoits, Robin and I 
found the tracks of a female leopard. This leopard was well 
known to Robin and me, for she had lived for several years in a 
heavy patch of Iantana at the lower end of our village. Apart 
from never molesting our cattle, she had kept pigs and 
monkeys from damaging our crops, so we ignored her tracks 
and carried on along the Trunk Road in the direction of 
Garuppu. There had been no traffic on the road since the 
previous evening, and the tracks of animals who had used or 
crossed it were registered on the dusty surface. 

From the rifle in my hands Robin, who was a wise dog and my 
constant companion, knew we were not after birds so he paid 
no attention to the pea fowl that occasionally scurried across 
the road or to the jungle fowl that were scratching up the dead 
leaves at the side of it, but concentrated on the tracks of a 
tigress and her two half-grown cubs that had gone down the 
road an hour ahead of us. In places the wide road was 
overgrown with short dub grass. On this dew-drenched grass 



the cubs had rolled and tumbled, and Robin filled his nostrils to 
his heart's content with the sweet and terrifying smell of tiger. 
The family had kept to the road for a mile and had then gone 
east along a game track. Three miles from the junction, and 
two miles above Garuppu, a well-used game track coming from 
the direction of Naya Gaon crosses the road diagonally, and on 
this track we saw the fresh pug marks of a big male leopard. 

We had found what we were looking for. This leopard had come 
from the grazing ground and crossed the road. It was capable 
of killing a full-grown cow and there were not likely to be two 
leopards of this size in the same area. Robin was keen on 
following up the tracks, but the dense scrub jungle the leopard 
was making for— the same jungle in which Kunwar Singh and 
Har Singh had nearly lost their lives some years previously— 
was not suitable for stalking an animal with the sight and 
hearing of a leopard. Moreover, I had a better and simpler plan 
of making contact with the leopard, so we turned about and 
made for home and breakfast. 

After lunch Robin and I, accompanied by Maggie, retraced our 
steps down the Garuppu road. The leopard had not killed any of 
our cattle the previous day but he might have killed a chital or 
a pig which shared the grazing ground with the cattle; and 
even if he had no kill to return to there was a very good chance 
of his visiting his regular hunting ground. So Maggie and I, 
with Robin lying between us, took up position behind a bush on 
the side of the road, a hundred yards from the game track 
along which the leopard had gone that morning. We had been 
in position about an hour, listening to the multitude of bird 
calls, when a peacock in full plumage majestically crossed the 
road and went down the game path. A little later, ten or a 
dozen chital, in the direction of the heavy jungle in which we 
expected the leopard to be lying up, warned the jungle folk of 
the presence of a leopard. Ten minutes thereafter, and a little 
nearer to us, a single chital repeated the warning. The leopard 
was on the move and coming in our direction, and as he was 
making no attempt to conceal himself he was probably on his 



way to a kill. Robin had lain with chin on outstretched paws 
without movement, listening as we were to what the jungle folk 
had to say and when he saw me draw up my leg and rest the 
rifle on my knee, his body, which was against my left leg, 
started to tremble. The spotted killer, whom he feared more 
than any other beast in the jungle would presently put its head 
out of the bushes and, after looking up and down the road, 
would come towards us. Whether it died in its tracks, or roared 
and tumbled about with a mortal wound, he would remain 
perfectly still and silent, for he was taking part in a game with 
every move of which he was familiar, and which was as 
fascinating as it was terrifying. 

After going a short distance down the game path the peacock 
had climbed into the branches of a plum tree and was busily 
engaged in eating ripe fruit. Suddenly it sprang into the air 
with a harsh scream and alighted on the limb of a dead tree, 
adding its warning to that already given by the chital. A few 
minutes now, five at the most, for the leopard would approach 
the road very cautiously, and then out of the corner of my eye I 
caught sight of a movement far down the road. It was a man 
running, and every now and then, without slackening his pace, 
he looked over his shoulder behind him. To see a man on that 
road at this hour of the evening— the sun was near setting— 
was very unusual, and to see him alone was even more 
unusual. Every stride the man took lessened our chances of 
bagging the leopard. However, that could not be helped, for the 
runner was evidently in great distress, and possibly in need of 
help. I recognized him while he was still some distance from 
us; he was a tenant in a village adjoining ours who during the 
winter months was engaged as herdsman at a cattle station 
three miles east of Garuppu. 

On catching sight of us the runner started violently, but when 
he recognized me he came towards us and in a very agitated 
voice said, 'Run, Sahib, run for your life! Sultana's men are 
after me.' 



He was winded and in great distress. Taking no notice of my 
invitation to sit down and rest, he turned his leg and said, 'See 
what they have done to me! If they catch me they will surely 
kill me and you also, if you do not run.' The leg he turned for 
our inspection was slashed from the back of the knee to the 
heel, and dust-clotted blood was flowing from the ugly wound. 
Telling the man that if he would not rest there was at least no 
need for him to run any more, I moved out of the bushes to 
where I could get a clear view down the road, while the man 
limped off in the direction of his village. Neither the leopard 
nor Sultana's men showed up, and when there was no longer 
light for accurate shooting, Maggie and I, with a very disgusted 
Robin at our heels, returned to our home at Kaladhungi. 

Next morning I got the man's story. He was grazing his 
buffaloes between Garuppu and the cattle station when he 
heard a gunshot. The nephew of the headman of his village had 
arrived at the cattle station at dawn that morning with the 
object of poaching a chital, and while he had been sitting in the 
shade of a tree, speculating as to whether the shot had been 
effective or not and, if effective, whether a portion of the 
venison would be left at the cattle station for his evening meal, 
he heard a rustle behind him. Looking round, he saw five men 
standing over him. He was told to get up and take the party to 
where the gun had been fired. When he said he had been 
asleep and had not heard the shot he was ordered to lead the 
way to the cattle station, to which they thought the gunman 
would probably go. The party had no firearms, but the man who 
appeared to be their leader had a naked sword in his hand and 
said he would cut the herdsman's head off with it if he 
attempted to run away or shout a warning. 

As they made their way through the jungle the swordsman 
informed the herdsman that they were members of Sultana's 
gang and that Sultana was camped near by. When he heard the 
shot Sultana had ordered them to bring him the gun. Therefore 
if they met with any opposition at the cattle station they would 
burn it down and kill their guide. This threat presented my 



friend with a dilemma. His companions at the cattle station 
were a tough lot, and if they offered resistance he would 
undoubtedly be killed; on the other hand, if they did not resist, 
his crime in leading the dread Sultana's men to the station 
would never be forgotten or forgiven. While these unpleasant 
thoughts were running through his head a chital stag pursued 
by a pack of wild dogs came dashing through the jungle and 
passed within a few yards of them. Seeing that his escort had 
stopped and were watching the chase the herdsman dived into 
the high grass on the side of the path and, despite the wound 
he received on his leg as the swordsman tried to cut him down, 
he had managed to shake his pursuers off and gain the Trunk 
Road, where in due course he ran into us while we were 
waiting for the leopard. 

Sultana was a member of the Bhantu criminal tribe. With the 
rights and wrongs of classing a tribe as' criminal' and confining 
it within the four walls of the Najibabad Fort I am not 
concerned. It suffices to say that Sultana, with his young wife 
and infant son and some hundreds of other Bhantus, was 
confined in the fort under the charge of the Salvation Army. 
Chafing at his confinement, he scaled the mud walls of the fort 
one night and escaped, as any young and high-spirited man 
would have done. This escape had been effected a year 
previous to the opening of my story and during that year 
Sultana had collected a hundred kindred spirits, all armed with 
guns, around him. This imposing gang, whose declared object 
was dacoity, led a roving life in the jungles of the Terai and 
Bhabar, their activities extending from Gonda in the east to 
Saharanpur in the west, a distance of several hundred miles, 
with occasional raids into the adjoining province of the Punjab. 

There are many fat files in Government offices on the activities 
of Sultana and his gang of dacoits. I have not had access to 
these files, and if my story, which only deals with events in 
which I took part or events which came to my personal notice, 
differs or conflicts in any respects with Government reports I 
can only express my regret. At the same time I do not retract 



one word of my story. I first heard of Sultana when he was 
camping in the Garuppu jungles a few miles from our winter 
home at Kaladhungi. Percy Wyndham was at that time 
Commissioner of Kumaon, and as the Terai and Bhabar forests 
in which Sultana had apparently established himself were in 
Wyndham's charge he asked Government for the services of 
Freddy Young, a keen young police officer with a few years' 
service in the United Provinces to his credit. The Government 
granted Wyndham's request, and sanctioned the creation of a 
Special Dacoity Police Force of three hundred picked men. 
Freddy was put in supreme command of this force and given a 
free hand in the selection of his men. He earned a lot of 
unpopularity by building up his force with the best men from 
adjoining districts, for Sultana was a coveted prize and their 
own officers resented having to surrender men who might have 
helped them to acquire the prize. 

While Freddy was mustering his force. Sultana was getting his 
hand in by raiding small townships in the Terai and Bhabar. 
Freddy's first attempt to capture Sultana was made in the 
forests west of Ramnagar. The Forest Department were felling 
a portion of these forests, employing a large labour force, and 
one of the contractors in charge of the labour was induced to 
invite Sultana, who was known to be camping in the vicinity, to 
a dance to be followed by a feast. Sultana and his merry men 
accepted the invitation, but just before the festivities began 
they prevailed on their host to make a slight alteration in the 
programme and have the feast first and the dance later. 

Sultana said his men would enjoy the dance more on full 
stomachs than on empty ones. Here it is necessary to interrupt 
my story to explain for the benefit of those who have never 
been in the East that guests at a dance, or a 'nautch' as it is 
called here, do not take any part in the proceedings. The 
dancing is confined to a troop of professional dancing-girls and 
their male orchestra. Funds in plenty were available on both 
sides and, as money goes as far in the East towards buying 
information as it does in the West, one of the first moves of the 



two contestants in the game that was to be played was the 
organization of efficient secret services. Here Sultana had the 
advantage, for whereas Freddy could only reward for services 
rendered. Sultana could not only reward but could also punish 
for information withheld, or for information about his 
movements to the police, and when his method of dealing with 
offenders became known none were willing to court his 
displeasure. 

Having known what it was to be poor, really poor, during his 
long years of confinement in the Najibabad Fort, Sultana had a 
warm corner in his heart for all poor people. It was said of him 
that, throughout his career as a dacoit, he never robbed a pice 
from a poor man, never refused an appeal for charity, and paid 
twice the price asked for all he purchased from small 
shopkeepers. Little wonder then that his intelligence staff 
numbered hundreds and that he knew the invitation he had 
received to the dance and feast had been issued at Freddy's 
instigation. 

Meanwhile plans were on foot for the great night. The 
contractor, reputed to be a rich man, extended invitations to his 
friends in Ramnagar and in Kashipur; the best dancing-girls 
and their orchestras were engaged, and large guantities of 
eatables and drink— the latter specially for the benefit of the 
dacoits— were purchased and transported by bullock cart to 
the camp. 

At the appointed time on the night that was to see the undoing 
of Sultana, the contractor's guests assembled and the feast 
began. It is possible that the contractor's friends did not show 
who their fellow guests were, for on these occasions the 
different castes sit in groups by themselves and the 
illumination provided by firelight and a few lanterns was of the 
poorest. Sultana and his men ate and drank wisely and well, 
and when the feast was nearing its end the dacoit leader led 
his host aside, thanked him for his hospitality, and said that as 
he and his men had a long away to go he regretted they could 



not stay for the dance. Before leaving, however, he requested— 
and Sultana's requests were never disregarded— that the 
festivities should continue as had been arranged. 

The principal instrument of music at a nautch is a drum, and 
the sound of the drums was to be Freddy's signal to leave the 
position he had taken up and deploy his force to surround the 
camp. One section of this force was led by a forest guard, and 
the night being dark the forest guard lost his way. This section, 
which was to have blocked Sultana's line of retreat, remained 
lost for the remainder of the night. As a matter of fact the 
forest guard, who had to live in the forest with Sultana and was 
a wise man, need not have given himself the trouble of getting 
lost, for by his request for a slight alteration in the programme 
Sultana had given himself ample time to get clear of the net 
before the signal was given. So all that the attacking force 
found when they arrived at the camp, after a long and a 
difficult march through dense forest, was a troop of frightened 
girls, their even more frightened orchestra, and the mystified 
friends of the contractor. After his escape from the Ramnagar 
forests Sultana paid a visit to the Punjab. Here, with no forests 
in which to shelter, he was out of his element and after a brief 
stay, which yielded a hundred thousand rupees' worth of gold 
ornaments, he returned to the dense jungles of the United 
Provinces. On his way back from the Punjab he had to cross the 
Ganges canal, the bridges over which are spaced at intervals of 
four miles, and as his movements were known, the bridges he 
was likely to cross were heavily guarded. Avoiding these. 
Sultana made for a bridge which his intelligence staff informed 
him was not guarded, and on his way passed close to a large 
village in which a band was playing Indian music. On learning 
from his guides that a rich man's son was being married, he 
ordered them to take him to the village. 

The wedding party and some thousand guests were assembled 
on a wide open space in the centre of the village. As he entered 
the glare of the high-powered lamps Sultana's appearance 
caused a stir, but he requested the assembly to remain seated 



and added that if they complied with his request they had 
nothing to fear. He then summoned the headman of the village 
and the father of the bridegroom and made it known that, as 
this was a propitious time for the giving and receiving of gifts, 
he would like the headman's recently purchased gun for 
himself and ten thousand rupees in cash for his men. The gun 
and the money were produced in the shortest time possible, 
and having wished the assembly good night Sultana led his 
men out of the village. Not till the following day did he learn 
that his lieutenant, Pailwan, had abducted the bride. Sultana 
did not approve of women being molested by his gang, so 
Pailwan was severely reprimanded and the girl was sent back, 
with a suitable present to compensate her for the 
inconvenience to which she had been put. After the incident of 
the herdsman's slashed leg Sultana remained in our vicinity for 
some time. He moved camp frequently and I came upon several 
old sites while out shooting. It was at this time that I had a very 
exciting experience. 

One evening I shot a fine leopard on a fire-track five miles from 
home, and as there was not sufficient time to collect carriers to 
bring it in, I skinned it on the spot and carried the skin home; 
but on arrival I found that I had left my favourite hunting-knife 
behind. 

Early next morning I set out to retrieve the knife and as I 
approached the spot where I had left it I saw the glimmer of a 
fire through a forest glade, some distance from the track. 
Reports of Sultana's presence in this forest had been coming in 
for some days, and on the spur of the moment I decided to 
investigate the fire. Heavy dew on the dead leaves made it 
possible to move without sound, so taking what cover was 
available I stalked the fire, which was burning in a little hollow, 
and found some twenty to twenty-five men sitting round it. 
Stacked upright against a nearby tree, the fire glinting on their 
barrels, were a number of guns. Sultana was not present, for, 
though I had not seen him up to that time, he had been 
described to me as a young man, small and trim, who invariably 



dressed in semi-military khaki uniform. This was evidently part 
of his gang, however, and what was I going to do about it? The 
old head constable and his equally elderly force of two 
constables at Kaladhungi would be of little help, and Haldwani, 
where there was a big concentration of police, was fifteen miles 
away While I was considering my next move, I heard one oi the 
men say it was time to be going. Fearing that if I now tried to 
retreat I should be seen, and trouble might follow, 1 took a few 
rapid steps forward and got between the men and their guns. 

As I did so a ring of surprised faces looked up at me, for I was 
on slightly higher ground. When I asked them what they were 
doing here the men looked at each other, and the first to 
recover from his surprise said, 'Nothing'. In reply to further 
questions I was told that they were charcoal burners who had 
come from Bareilly and had lost their way. I then turned and 
looked towards the tree, and found that what I had taken to be 
gun barrels were stacked axes, the handles of which, polished 
by long and hard use, had reflected the firelight. Telling the 
men that my feet were wet and cold I joined their circle, and 
after we had smoked my cigarettes and talked of many things, I 
directed them to the charcoal-burners' camp they were looking 
for, recovered my knife, and returned home. 

In times of sustained excitement imagination is apt to play 
queer tricks. Sitting on the ground near a sambhar killed by a 
tiger I have heard the tiger coming and coming, and getting no 
nearer, and when the tension had become unbearable have 
turned round with finger on trigger to find a caterpillar biting 
minute bits out of a crisp leaf near my head. Again, when the 
light was fading and the time had come for the tiger to return 
to his kill, out of the corner of my eye I have seen a large 
animal appear; and as I was gripping my rifle and preparing for 
a shot an ant had crawled out on a dry twig a few inches from 
my face. With my thoughts on Sultana the glint of firelight on 
the polished axe-handles had converted them into gun barrels, 
and I never looked at them again until the men had convinced 
me they were charcoal burners. With his efficient organization 



and better means of transport, Freddy was beginning to exert 
pressure on Sultana, and to ease the strain the dacoit leader 
took his gang, by this time considerably reduced by desertion 
and capture, to Pilibhit on the eastern border of the district. 
Here he remained for a few months, raiding as far afield as 
Gorakhpur and building up his store of gold. 

On his return to the forests in our vicinity he learned that a 
very rich dancing-girl from the State of Rampur had recently 
taken up residence with the headman of Lamachour, a village 
seven miles from our home. Anticipating a raid, the headman 
provided himself with a guard of thirty of his tenants. The 
guard was not armed, and when Sultana arrived, before his 
men were able to surround the house the dancing-girl slipped 
through a back door and escaped into the night with all her 
jewellery. The headman and his tenants were rounded up in the 
courtyard, and when they denied all knowledge of the girl 
orders were given to tie them up and beat them to refresh their 
memories. To this order one of the tenants raised an objection. 
He said Sultana could do what he liked to him and his fellow 
tenants, but that he had no right to disgrace the headman by 
having him tied up and beaten. He was ordered to keep his 
mouth shut, but as one of the dacoits advanced towards the 
headman with a length of rope this intrepid man pulled a 
length of bamboo out of a lean-to and dashed at the dacoit. He 
was shot through the chest by one of the gang, but fearing the 
shot would arouse armed men in neighbouring villages Sultana 
beat a hasty retreat, taking with him a horse which the 
headman had recently purchased. I heard of the murder of the 
brave tenant next morning and sent one of my men to 
Lamachour to inquire what family the dead man had left, and I 
sent another man with an open letter to all the headmen of the 
surrounding villages to ask if they would join in raising a fund 
for the support of his family. The response to my appeal was as 
generous as I expected it to be, for the poor are always 
generous, but the fund was never raised, for the man who had 
given his life for his master came from Nepal twenty years 



previously, and neither his friends nor the inquiries I made in 
Nepal revealed that he had a wife or children. It was after the 
incident just related that I accepted Freddy's invitation to take 
a hand in rounding up Sultana, and a month later I joined him 
at his headquarters at Hardwar, During his eighteen years as 
Collector of Mirzapur Wyndham had employed ten Koles and 
ten Bhunyas from the tribes living in the Mirzapur forests to 
assist him in tiger shooting, and the four best of these men, 
who were old friends of mine, were now placed by Wyndham at 
Freddy's disposal and I found them waiting for me at Hardwar. 
Freddy's plan was for my four friends and myself to track down 
Sultana, and when we had done this, to lead his force to a 
convenient place from which to launch his attack. Both these 
operations, for reasons already given, were to be carried out at 
night. But Sultana was restless. Perhaps it was just 
nervousness or he may have had forewarning of Freddy's plans; 
anyway he never stayed for more than a day in anyone place, 
and he moved his force long distances at night. The weather 
was intensely hot and eventually, tired of inaction, the four men 
and I held a council of war the result of which was that after 
dinner that night, when Freddy was comfortably seated in a 
cool part of the veranda where there was no possibility of our 
being overheard, I put the following proposal before him. He 
was to let it be known that Wyndham had recalled his men for a 
tiger shoot, to which I had been invited, and was to have 
tickets to Haldwani purchased for us and see us off from the 
Hardwar station by the night train. At the first stop the train 
made, however, the four men, armed with guns provided by 
Freddy, and I with my own rifle were to leave the train. 
Thereafter we were to have a free hand to bring in Sultana, 
dead or alive, as opportunity offered. 

Freddy sat for a long time with his eyes closed after hearing my 
proposal— he weighed 20 stone 4 pounds and was apt to doze 
after dinner— but he was not asleep, for he suddenly sat up 
and in a very decided voice said, 'No. I am responsible for your 
lives, and I won't sanction this mad 'scheme'. Arguing with him 



was of no avail, so the next morning the four men and I left for 
our respective homes. 1 was wrong to have made the proposal 
and Freddy was right in turning it down. The four men and I 
had no official standing, and had trouble resulted from our 
attempt to capture Sultana our action could not have been 
justified. For the rest, neither Sultana's life nor ours was in any 
danger, for we had agreed that if Sultana could not be taken 
alive he would not be taken at all, and we were quite capable of 
looking after ourselves. Three months later, when the monsoon 
was in full blast, Freddy asked Herbert of the Forest 
Department, Fred Anderson, Superintendent of the Terai and 
Bhabar, and myself, to join him at Hardwar, On arrival we 
learnt that Freddy had located Sultana's permanent camp in 
the heart of the Najibabad jungles, and he wanted us to assist 
him in surrounding the camp, and to cut off Sultana's retreat if 
he slipped out of the ring. 

Herbert, a famous polo player, was to be put in command of the 
fifty mounted men who were to prevent Sultana's escape, while 
Anderson and I were to accompany Freddy and help him to 
form the ring. By this time Freddy had no illusions about the 
efficiency of Sultana's intelligence service, and with the 
exception of Freddy's two assistants, and the three of us no one 
knew of the contemplated raid. Each evening the police force, 
fully armed, were sent out on a long route march, while the 
four of us went out for an equally long walk, returning after 
dark to the Dam Bungalow in which we were staying. On the 
appointed night, instead of marching over the level crossing as 
they had been wont to do, the route marchers went through the 
Hardwar goods yard to a siding in which a rake of wagons, with 
engine and brake-van attached, was standing with doors open 
on the side away from the station buildings. The last of the 
doors was being shut as we arrived, and the moment we had 
climbed into the guard's van the train, without any warning 
whistles, started. Everything that could be done to allay 
suspicion had been done, even to the cooking of the men's food 
in their lines and to the laying of our table for dinner. We had 



started an hour after dark. At 9 p.m. the train drew up between 
two stations in the heart of the jungle and the order was passed 
from wagon to wagon for the force to detrain, and as soon as 
this order had been carried out the train steamed on. 

Of Freddy's force of three hundred men, the fifty to be Led by 
Herbert— who served in France in the First World War with the 
Indian cavalry— had been sent out the previous night with 
instructions to make a wide detour to where their mounts were 
waiting for them, while the main force of two hundred and fifty 
men with Freddy and Anderson in the lead, and myself bringing 
up the rear, set off for a destination which was said to be some 
twenty miles away. Heavy clouds had been banking up all day 
and when we left the train it was raining in torrents. 

Our direction was north for a mile, then east for two miles, 
again north for a mile, then west for two miles and finally again 
north. I knew the changes in direction were being made to 
avoid villages in which there were men in Sultana's pay, and 
the fact that not a village pye, the best watchdog in the world, 
barked at us testifies to the skill with which the manoeuvre was 
carried out. Hour after hour I plodded on, in drenching rain, in 
the wake of two hundred and fifty heavy men who had left pot 
holes in the soft ground into which I floundered up to my knees 
at every second step. For miles we went through elephant 
grass higher than my head, and balancing on the pitted and 
slippery ground became more difficult from the necessity of 
using one hand to shield my eyes from the stiff razor-edged 
grass. I had often marvelled at Freddy's 20 stone 4 pounds of 
energy, but never as I did that night. True, he was walking on 
comparatively firm ground while I was walking in a bog; yet 
even so he was carrying nine stone more than I, and the line 
moved on with never a halt. 

We had started at 9 p.m. At 2 a.m. I sent a verbal message up 
the line to ask Freddy if we were going in the right direction. I 
sent this message because for an hour we had left our original 
direction northwards, and had been going east. After a long 



interval word came back that the Captain Sahib said it was all 
right. After another two hours, through thick tree and scrub 
jungle or across patches of high grass, I sent a second message 
to Freddy asking him to halt the line as I was coming up to 
speak to him. Silence had been enjoined before starting, and as 
I made my way to the front I passed a very quiet and weary line 
of men, some of them sitting on the wet ground and others 
leaning against trees. I found Freddy and Anderson with their 
four guides at the head of the column. When Freddy asked if 
anything was wrong— this I knew referred to stragglers— I 
said all was well with the men but otherwise everything was 
wrong, for we were walking in circles. Having lived so much of 
my life in jungles in which it is very easy to get lost I have 
acquired a sense of direction which functions as well by night 
as it does by day. Our change of direction when we first started 
had been as evident to me as it had been two hours back when 
we changed direction from north to east. In addition, an hour 
previously I had noted that we passed under a simul tree with a 
vulture's nest in it, and when 1 sent my message to Freddy to 
halt the line I was again under the same tree. Of the four 
guides, two were Bhantus of Sultana's gang who had been 
captured a few days previously in the Hardwar bazaar, and on 
whose information the present raid had been organized. These 
two men had lived off and on for two years in Sultana's camp 
and had been promised their freedom for this night's work. The 
other two were cattle men who had grazed their cattle in these 
jungles all their lives, and who daily supplied Sultana with milk. 
All four men stoutly denied having lost their way, but on being 
pressed, they hesitated, and finally admitted that they would 
feel happier about the direction in which they were leading the 
force if they could see the hills. To see the hills, possibly thirty 
miles away, on a dark night with thick fog descending down to 
tree-top level, was impossible, so here was a check which 
threatened to ruin all Freddy's well-laid plans and, what was 
even worse, to give Sultana the laugh on us. Our intention had 
been a surprise attack on the camp, and in order to accomplish 
this it was necessary to get within striking distance while it 



was still dark. The guides had informed us that it was not 
possible to approach the camp in daylight from the side we had 
chosen without being seen by two guards who were constantly 
on watch from a machan in a high tree which overlooked a 
wide stretch of grass to the south of the camp. With our guides 
now freely admitting they had lost their way only another hour 
of darkness left and, worst of all, without knowing how far we 
were from the camp or in which direction it lay, our chance of a 
surprise attack was receding with every minute that passed. 
Then a way out of the dilemma occurred to me. I asked the four 
men if there was any feature, such as a stream or a well- 
defined cattle-track, in the direction in which we had originally 
started, by which they could regain direction, and when they 
replied that there was an old and well-defined cart-track a mile 
to the south of the camp, I obtained Freddy's permission to 
take the lead. I set off at a fast pace in a direction which all 
who were following me were, I am sure, convinced would lead 
back to the railway line we had left seven hours earlier. The 
rain had stopped, a fresh breeze had cleared the sky of clouds, 
and it was just getting light in the east when I stumbled into a 
deep cart-rut. Here was the disused track the guides had 
mentioned, and their joy on seeing it confirmed the opinion I 
had formed earlier, that losing themselves in the jungle had not 
been intentional. Taking over the lead again, the men led us 
along the track for a mile to where a well-used game-track 
crossed it. Half a mile up the game-track we came to a deep 
and sluggish stream some thirty feet wide which I was glad to 
see the track did not cross, for I am terrified of these Terai 
streams, on the banks and in the depths of which I have seen 
huge pythons lurking. The track skirted the right bank of the 
stream, through shoulder-high grass, and after going along it 
for a few hundred yards the men slowed down. From the way 
they kept looking to the left I concluded we were getting within 
sight of the machan, for it was now full daylight with the sun 
touching the tops of the trees. Presently the leading man 
crouched down, and when his companions had done the same, 
he beckoned us to approach. 



After signalling to the line to halt and sit down, Freddy, 
Anderson, and I crept up to the leading guide. Lying beside him 
and looking through the grass in the direction in which he was 
pointing we saw a machan built in the upper branches of a big 
tree, between thirty and forty feet above ground. On the 
machan, with the level sun shining on them, were two men, one 
sitting with his right shoulder towards us smoking a hookah, 
and the other lying on his back with his knees drawn up. The 
tree in which the machan was built was growing on the border 
of the tree and grass jungle and overlooked a wide expanse of 
open ground. Sultana's camp, the guides said, was three 
hundred yards inside the tree jungle. 

A few feet from where we were lying was a strip of short grass 
twenty yards wide, running from the stream on our right far 
out on to the open ground. To retreat a little, cross the stream, 
and recross it opposite Sultana's camp was the obvious thing to 
do, but the guides said this would not be possible; not only was 
the stream too deep to wade, but there was quicksand along 
the far bank. There remained the doubtful possibility of getting 
the whole force across the strip of short grass without being 
seen by the two guards, either of whom might at any moment 
look in our direction. Freddy had a service revolver, Anderson 
was unarmed, and I was the only one in the whole force who 
was carrying a rifle— the police were armed with 12-bore 
muskets using buckshot, with an effective range of from sixty 
to eighty yards. I was therefore the only one of the party who 
could deal with the two guards from our present position. The 
rifle shots would, of course, be heard in the camp, but the two 
Bhantus with us were of the opinion that when the guards did 
not return to the camp to report, men would be sent out to 
make inquiries. They thought that while this was being done it 
would be possible for us to encircle the camp. The two men on 
the machan were outlaws, and quite -possibly murderers to 
boot, and with the rifle in my hands I could have shot the 
hookah out of the smoker's hands and 'the heel off the other 
man's shoe without injury to either. But to shoot the men in 



cold, or in any other temperature of blood, was beyond my 
powers. So I made the following alternative suggestion: that 
Freddy give me permission to stalk the men— which would be 
guite easy, for the tall grass and tree jungle extended right up 
to the tree in which the machan was built and was soaking wet 
after the all-night rain— and occupy the machan with them 
while Freddy and his men carried on with their job. At first 
Freddy demurred, for there were two guns on the machan 
within easy reach of the men's hands, but eventually he 
consented and without further ado I slipped across the open 
ground and set off, for the Bhantus said the time was 
approaching for the guards to be changed. 

I had covered about a third of the way to the tree when I heard 
a noise behind and saw Anderson hurrying after me. What 
Anderson had said to Freddy, or Freddy had said to Anderson I 
do not know— both were my very good friends. Anyway, 
Anderson was determined to accompany me. He admitted he 
could not get through the jungle silently; that there was a good 
chance of the men on the machan hearing and seeing us; that 
we might run into the relief guard or find additional guards at 
the foot of the tree; that being unarmed he would not be able to 
defend himself, nevertheless and not withstanding, he was not 
going to let me go alone. When a man from across the Clyde 
digs his toes in he is more stubborn than a mule. 

In desperation I started to retrace my steps to solicit Freddy's 
help. But Freddy in the meantime had had time to regret his 
sanction (I learnt later the Bhantus had informed him the men 
on the machan were very good shots), and when he saw us 
returning he gave the signal for the line to advance. Fifty or 
more men had crossed the open strip of ground and we who 
were in advance were within two hundred yards of the camp 
when a zealous young constable, catching sight of the machan, 
fired off his musket. The two men on the machan were down 
the ladder in a flash. They mounted the horses that were 
tethered at the foot of the tree and raced for the camp. There 
was now no longer any necessity for silence and in a voice that 



did not need the aid of a megaphone, Freddy gave the order to 
charge. In a solid line we swept down on the camp, to find it 
deserted. The camp was on a little knoll and consisted of three 
tents and a grass hut used as a kitchen. One of the tents was a 
store and was stacked with sacks of atta, rice, dal, sugar, tins of 
ghee, two pyramids of boxes containing some thousands of 
rounds of 12-bore ammunition, and eleven guns in gun cases. 
The other two tents were sleeping places and were strewn with 
blankets and a medley of articles of clothing. Hanging from 
branches near the kitchen were three flayed goats. 

In the confusion following the arrival in camp of the two guards 
it was possible that some of the partly clothed gang had taken 
shelter in the high grass surrounding the camp, so orders were 
given to our men to make a long line, our intention being to 
beat a wide strip of jungle in the direction in which Herbert 
and his mounted men were on guard. While the line was being 
formed I made a cast round the knoll. Having found the tracks 
of ten or a dozen barefooted men in a nullah close to the camp, 

I suggested to Freddy that we should follow them and see 
where they led to. The nullah was fifteen feet wide and five feet 
deep, and Freddy, Anderson, and I had proceeded along it for 
about two hundred yards when we came on an outcrop of 
gravel, where 1 lost the tracks. Beyond the gravel the nullah 
opened out and on the left bank, near where we were standing, 
was a giant banyan tree with multiple stems. With its forest of 
stems, and branches sweeping down to the ground, this tree 
appeared to me to be an ideal place for anyone to hide in, so 
going to the bank, which at this point was as high as my chin, I 
attempted to climb up. There was no handhold on the bank and 
each time I kicked a hole in the soft earth the foothold gave 
way, and I wasjust contemplating going forward and getting on 
to the bank where the nullah Rattened out, when a fusillade of 
shots followed by shouting broke out in the direction of the 
camp. We dashed back the waywe had come and near the camp 
found a Havildar shot through the chest, and near him a dacoit, 
with a wisp of cloth round his loins, shot through both legs. The 



Havildar was sitting on the ground with his back to a tree; his 
shirt was open, and on the nipple of his left breast there was a 
spot of blood. Freddy produced a flask and put it to the 
Havildar's lips, but the man shook his head and put the flask 
aside, saying, 'It is wine. I cannot drink it'. When pressed he 
added, 'All my life I have been an abstainer, and I cannot go to 
my Creator with wine on my lips. I am thirsty and crave a little 
water'. His brother was standing near by. Someone gave him a 
hat and he dashed off to the stream that had hampered our 
movements, and returned in a few minutes with some dirty 
water which the wounded man drank eagerly. The wound had 
been made by a pellet of shot and when I could not feel it under 
the skin I said, 'Keep a strong heart, Havildar Sahib, and the 
doctor at Najibabad will make you well 1 . Smiling up at me he 
replied, 'I will keep a strong heart. Sahib; but no doctor can 
make me well 1 . 

The dacoit had no inhibitions about 'wine, 1 and in a few gulps 
he emptied the contents of the flask of which he was in great 
need, for he had been shot with a 12-bore musket at very short 
range. 

Two stretchers were improvised from material taken from 
Sultana's camp, and willing hands— for no distinction was 
made between the high-caste member of the police force and 
the low-caste dacoit— took them up. With spare runners 
running alongside, the stretchers set off through the jungle for 
the Najibabad hospital twelve miles away. The dacoit died of 
loss of blood and of shock on the way, and the Havildar died a 
few minutes after being admitted to the hospital. The beat was 
abandoned. Herbert did not come into the picture, for Sultana 
had been warned of the concentration of horse and none of the 
dacoits tried to cross the line he was guarding. So the sum 
total of our carefully planned raid, which had miscarried 
through no one's fault, was Sultana's entire camp less a few 
guns, and two dead men One a poor man, who, chafing at 
confinement, had sough liberty and adopted the only means of 
livelihood open to him and who would be mourned by a widow 



in the Najibabad fort. And the other a man respected by his 
superiors and loved by his men, whose widow would be cared 
for, and who had bravely died for a principle— for the 'wine' 
with which he refused to defile his lips would have sustained 
him until he had been laid on the operating table. 

Three days after the raid Freddy received a letter from the 
dacoit leader in which Sultana regretted that a shortage of 
arms and ammunition in the police force had necessitated a 
raid on his camp, and stating that if in future Freddy would let 
him know his requirements he. Sultana, would be very glad to 
supply him. 

The supply of arms and ammunition to Sultana was a very sore 
point with Freddy. Stringent orders on the subject had been 
issued, but it was not surprising that every licensed dealer and 
every licensed gun-holder in the area in which Sultana was 
operating was willing to risk the Government's displeasure 
when the alternative was the certainty of having his house 
raided, and the possibility of having his throat cut, if he refused 
Sultana's demands. So the offer of arms and ammunition was 
no idle one and it was the most unkind cut the dacoit leader 
could have delivered to the head of the Special Dacoity Police 
Force. 

With his hide-out gone, harried from end to end of the Terai 
and Bhabar, and with his gang reduced to forty— all well 
armed, for the dacoits had soon replaced the arms and 
ammunition taken from them— Freddy thought the time had 
now come for Sultana to surrender. So, after obtaining 
Government sanction— which was given on the understanding 
that he personally accepted full responsibility— he invited 
Sultana to a meeting, whenever and wherever convenient. 
Sultana accepted the invitation, named the time, date, and 
place, and stipulated that both should attend the meeting alone 
and unarmed. On the appointed day, as Freddy stepped out on 
one side of a wide open glade, in the centre of which a solitary 
tree was growing. Sultana stepped out on the other side. Their 



meeting was friendly, as all who have lived in the East would 
have expected it to be, and when they had seated themselves in 
the shade of the tree— one a mountain of energy and good 
humour with the authority of the Government behind him, and 
the other a dapper little man with a price on his head— Sultana 
produced a water melon which he smilingly said Freddy could 
partake of without reservation. The meeting ended in a 
deadlock, however, for Sultana refused to accept Freddy's 
terms of unconditional surrender. It was at this meeting that 
Sultana begged Freddy not to take undue risks. On the day of 
the raid, he said, he with ten of his men, all fully armed, had 
taken cover under a banyan tree and had watched Freddy and 
two other sahibs coming down the nullah towards the tree. 

'Had the sahib who was trying to climb the bank succeeded in 
doing so'. Sultana added, 'it would have been necessary to 
shoot the three of you.' 

The final round of the heavy-light-weight contest was now to be 
staged, and Freddy invited Wyndham and I myself to Hardwar 
to witness and take part in it. Sultana and the remnants of his 
gang, now weary of movement, had taken up residence at a 
cattle station in the heart of the Najibabad jungles, and 
Freddy's plan was to convey his entire force down the Ganges 
in boats, land at a convenient spot, and surround the cattle 
station. This raid, like the one already described, was to take 
place at night. But on this occasion the raid had been timed for 
the full moon. 

On the day chosen, the entire force of three hundred men, with 
the addition of Freddy's cousin, Wyndham, and myself, 
embarked as night was falling in ten country boats which had 
been assembled at a secluded spot on the right bank of the 
Ganges, a few miles below Hardwar. I was in the leading boat, 
and all went well until we crossed to the left bank and entered 
a side channel. The passage down this channel was one of the 
most terrifying experiences, off dry land, that I have ever had. 
For a few hundred yards the boat glided over a wide expanse of 
moonlit water without a ripple on its surface to distort the 



reflection of the trees on the margin. Gradually the channel 
narrowed and the speed of the boat increased, and at the same 
time we heard the distant sound of rushing water. I have often 
fished in these side channels of the Ganges, for they are 
preferred to the main stream by fish, and I marvelled at the 
courage of the boatmen who were willing to risk their lives and 
their craft in the rapids we were fast approaching. The boat, 
like the other nine, was an open cargo freighter eminently 
suitable for work on the open Ganges, but here in this narrow 
swift-flowing channel she was just an unmanageable hulk, 
which threatened to become a wreck every time her bottom 
planks came in violent contact with submerged boulders. The 
urgent call of the captain to his crew to fend the boat off the 
rocky banks and keep her in the middle of the stream, or she 
would founder, did nothing to allay my fears, for at the time the 
warning was given the boat was drifting sideways and 
threatening to break up or capsize every time she struck the 
bottom. But nightmares cannot last for ever. Though the one 
that night was long-drawn-out, for we had twenty miles to go, 
mostly through broken water, it ended when one of the 
boatmen sprang ashore on the left bank with one end of a long 
rope and made it fast to a tree. Boat after boat passed us and 
tied up lower down, until all ten had been accounted for. The 
force was disembarked on a sandy beach and when cuts and 
abrasions resulting from contact with the rough timbers of the 
boats had been attended to, and the boatmen had been 
instructed to take their craft five miles farther down stream 
and await orders, we set off in single file to battle our way 
through half a mile of the heaviest elephant grass I have ever 
tried to penetrate on foot. The grass was ten to twelve feet high 
and was weighted down with river fog and dew, and before we 
had gone a hundred yards we were wet to the skin. When we 
eventually arrived on the far side we were faced with a wide 
expanse of water which we took to be an old bed of the Ganges, 
and scouting parties were sent right and left to find the 
shortest way round the obstruction. The party that had gone to 
the right returned first and reported that a quarter of a mile 



from where we were standing the 'lake' narrowed, and that 
from this point to the junction of the channel down which we 
had come there was a swift-flowing river. Soon after the other 
party returned and reported that there was an unfordable river 
flowing into the upper end of the lake. It was now quite evident 
that our boatmen, intentionally or accidentally, had marooned 
us on an island. 

With our boats gone and daylight not far off it was necessary to 
do something, so we moved down to the lower end of the wide 
expanse of water to see if we could effect a crossing between it 
and the junction of the two channels. Where the water 
narrowed and the toe or draw of the stream started, there 
appeared to be a possible crossing; above this point the water 
was twenty feet deep, and below it was a raging torrent. While 
the rest of us were looking at the fast-flowing water and 
speculating as to whether anyone would be able to cross it, 
Wyndham was divesting himself of his clothes. When I 
remarked that this was an unnecessary proceeding in view of 
the fact that he was already wet to the skin, he replied that he 
was not thinking of his clothes, but of his life. When he had 
taken off every stitch of clothing he tied it into a bundle, using 
his shirt for the purpose, and placed the bundle firmly on his 
head, caught the arm of a strapping young constable standing 
near by and said, 'Come with me'. The young man was so taken 
aback at being selected to have the honour of drowning with 
the Commissioner Sahib that he said nothing, and together, 
with linked arms, the two stepped into the water. 

I do not think any of us breathed while we watched that 
crossing. With the water at times round their waists, and at 
times up to their armpits, it seemed impossible for them to 
avoid being carried off their feet and swept into the raging 
torrent below where no man, no matter how good a swimmer 
he was, could have lived. Steadily the two brave men, one the 
oldest in the party and the other possibly the youngest, fought 
their way on and when at last they struggled out on the far 
bank a sigh of relief went up from the spectators, which would 



have been a cheer audible in Hardwar, twenty miles away had 
silence not been imposed on us. 

Where two men could go three hundred could follow, so a chain 
was made; and though individual links were at times swept off 
their feet, the chain held, and the whole force landed safely on 
the far side. Here we were met by one of Freddy's most trusted 
informers who, pointing to the rising sun, said we had come too 
late; that it would not be possible for such a large force to 
cross the open ground between us and the forest without being 
seen by the herdsmen in the area, and that therefore the only 
thing for us to do was to go back to the island. So back to the 
island we went, the crossing from this side not being as bad as 
it had been from the other. 

Back in the elephant grass our first concern was to dry our 
clothes. This was soon accomplished, for the sun was by now 
hot, and when we were once again dry and warm Freddy, from 
his capacious haversack, produced a chicken and a loaf of 
bread which were no less welcome for having been immersed 
in the cold waters of the Ganges. I have the ability to sleep 
anywhere and at any time, and, having found a sandy hollow, 
most of the day had passed when I was awakened by violent 
sneezing. On joining my companions I found that all three of 
them were suffering from varying degrees of hay fever. The 
grass we were in was of the plumed variety and when we had 
passed through it in the early morning the plumes had been 
wet. But now, in the hot sun, the plumes had fluffed out and 
while moving about and trying to find cool places to rest in my 
companions had shaken the pollen down, with the result that 
they had given themselves hay fever. 

Indians do not get hay fever and I myself have never had it. 

This was the first time I had ever seen anyone suffering from it, 
and what I saw alarmed me. Freddy's cousin— a planter on 
holiday from Bengal— was the worst of the three; his eyes were 
streaming and swollen to the extent that he could not see, and 
his nose was running. Freddy could see a little but he could not 



stop sneezing, and when Freddy sneezed the earth shook. 
Wyndham, tough old campaigner that he was, while protesting 
that he was quite all right, was unable to keep his handkerchief 
away from his nose and eyes. It was bad enough being thrown 
about in an open boat, marooned on a desert island, and 
fording raging torrents; but here was the climax. To lead three 
men who threatened to go blind back to Hardwar at the head of 
the three hundred policemen was a prospect that made me feel 
colder than I had felt when crossing the ice-cold waters of the 
Ganges. As evening closed in the condition of the sufferers 
improved, much to my relief, and by the time we had crossed 
the ford for the third time Freddy and Wyndham were all right 
and the cousin had regained his sight to the extent that it was 
no longer necessary to tell him when to raise his foot to avoid a 
stone. Freddy's informer and a guide were waiting for us and 
led us over the open ground to the mouth of a dry watercourse 
about a hundred yards wide. The moon had just risen and 
visibility was nearly as good as in sunlight when, rounding a 
bend, we came face to face with an elephant We had heard 
there was a rogue elephant in this area, and here he was, tusks 
flashing in the moonlight, ears spread out, and emitting loud 
squeals. The guide did nothing to improve the situation by 
stating that the elephant was very bad tempered, that he had 
killed many people, and that he was sure to kill a number of us. 
At first it appeared that the rogue was going to make good the 
guide's predictions, for with trunk raised high he advanced a 
few yards. Then he swung round and dashed up the bank, 
trumpeting defiance as he gained the shelter of the jungle. 

Another mile up the watercourse and we came on what the 
guide said was a fire-track. Here the going was very pleasant, 
for with short green grass underfoot, and the moonlight 
glinting on every leaf and blade, it was possible to forget our 
errand and revel in the beauty of the jungle. As we approached 
a stretch of burnt grass where an old peacock, perched high on 
a leafless tree, was sending his warning cry into the night, two 
leopards stepped out on the track, saw us, and gracefully 



bounded away and faded out of sight in the shadows. I had 
been out of my element during the long passage down the side 
channel, but now, what with the elephant— who was, I knew, 
only curious and intended us no harm— and then the peacock 
warning the jungle folk of the presence of danger, and finally 
the leopards merging into the shadows, I was back on familiar 
ground, ground that I loved and understood. 

Leaving the track, which ran from east to west, the guide led 
us north for a mile or more through scrub and tree jungle to 
the bank of a tiny stream overhung by a giant banyan tree. 

Here we were told to sit down and wait, while the guide went 
forward to confer with his brother at the cattle station. A long 
and weary wait it was, which was in no way relieved by pangs 
of hunger, for we had eaten nothing since our meal off the 
chicken and loaf of bread, and it was now past midnight; and to 
make matters worse I, the only one who smoked, had 
exhausted my supply of cigarettes. The guide returned towards 
the early hours of the morning and reported that Sultana and 
the remnants of his gang, now reduced to nine, had left the 
cattle station the previous evening to raid a village in the 
direction of Hardwar and that they were expected back that 
night, or the following day. Before leaving to try to get us a 
little food, of which we were in urgent need, the guide and the 
informer warned us that we were in Sultana's territory and that 
it would be unwise for any of us to leave the shelter of the 
banyan tree. 

Another weary day passed, the last Wyndham could spend with 
us, for in addition to being Commissioner of Kumaon he was 
Political Agent of Tehri State and was due to meet the ruler at 
Narindra Nagar in two days time. After nightfall a cart loaded 
with grass arrived, and when the grass had been removed a 
few sacks of parched gram and forty pounds of gur were 
revealed. This scanty but welcome ration was distributed 
among the men. The guide had not forgotten the sahibs, and 
before driving away he handed Freddy a few chapattis tied up 
in a piece of cloth that had seen hard times and better days. As 



we lay on our backs with all topics of conversation exhausted, 
thinking of hot meals and soft beds in far-off Hardwar, I heard 
the welcome sounds of a leopard killing a chital a few hundred 
yards from our tree. Here was an opportunity of getting a 
square meal, for my portion of chapatti, far from allaying my 
hunger, had only added to it; so I jumped up and asked Freddy 
for his kukri. When he asked what on earth I wanted it for, I 
told him it was to cut off the hind legs of the chital the leopard 
had just killed. What leopard and what chital 1 , he asked, 'are 
you talking about?' Yes, he could hear the chital calling, but 
how was he to know that they were not alarmed by some of 
Sultana's men who were scouting round to spy on us? And 
anyway, if I was right in thinking a leopard had made a kill, 
which he doubted, how was I going to take the chital away 
from it when I could not use a musket (I had not brought my 
rifle with me on this occasion for I did not know to what use I 
might be asked to put it) so close to the cattle station? No, he 
concluded, the whole idea was absurd. So very regretfully I 
again lay down with my hunger. How could I convince anyone 
who did not know the jungle folk and their language that I 
knew the deer had not been alarmed by human beings; that 
they were watching one of their number being killed by a 
leopard; and that there was no danger in taking the kill, or as 
much of it as I wanted, away from the leopard? 

The night passed without further incident and at crack of dawn 
Wyndham and I set out on our long walk to Hardwar. We 
crossed the Ganges by the Bhimgoda Dam and after a quick 
meal at the Dam Bungalow had an evening's fishing on the 
wide expanse of water above the dam that will long be 
remembered. 

Next morning, just as Wyndham was leaving to keep-his 
appointment at Narindra Nagar, and I was collecting some 
eatables to take back to my hungry companions, word was 
brought to us by runner that Freddy had captured Sultana. 
Sultana had returned to the cattle station the previous evening. 
After his men had surrounded the station, Freddy crept up to 



the large hut used by the cattle men, and, seeing a sheeted 
figure asleep on the only charpoy the hut contained, sat down 
on it. Pinned down by 20 stone 4 pounds Sultana was not 
unable to offer any resistance, nor was he able to carry out his 
resolve of not being taken alive. Of the six dacoits in the hut at 
the time of the raid, four, including Sultana, were captured and 
the other two, Babu and Pailwan, Sultana's lieutenants, broke 
throught he police cordon and escaped, after being fired at. I 
do not know how many murders Sultana was responsible for, 
but when brought to trial the main charge against him was the 
murder, by one of his gang, of the tenant of the headman of 
Lamachour. While in the condemned cell Sultana sent for 
Freddy and bequeathed to him his wife and son in the 
Najibabad Fort, and his dog, of whom he was very fond. Freddy 
adopted the dog, and those who know Freddy will not need to 
be told that he faithfully carried out his promise to care for 
Sultana's family. 

Some months later Freddy, now promoted and the youngest 
man in the Indian Police service ever to be honoured by His 
Majesty the King with a C.I.E., was attending the annual Police 
Week at Moradabad. One of the functions at this week was a 
dinner to which all the police officers in the province were 
invited. During the dinner one of the waiters whispered to 
Freddy that his orderly wanted to speak to him. This orderly 
had been with Freddy during the years Freddy had been in 
pursuit of Sultana. Now, having an evening off, he had strolled 
down to the Moradabad railway station. While he was there, a 
train came in, and as he idly watched the passengers alighting 
two men came out of a, compartment near him. One of these 
men spoke to the other, who hastily put a handkerchief up to 
his face, but not before the orderly had seen that he had a 
piece of cotton wool sticking to his nose. The orderly kept his 
eye on the men, who had a considerable amount of luggage, 
and when they had made themselves comfortable in a corner of 
the waiting room he commandeered an ekka and hastened to 
inform Freddy. When Sultana's two lieutenants, Babu and 



Pailwan, broke through the cordon surrounding the cattle 
station, they had been fired at, and shortly thereafter a man 
had visited a small dispensary near Najibabad to have an injury 
to his nose, which he said had been caused by a dog bite, 
attended to. When reporting the case to the police, the 
compounder who dressed the wound said he suspected it had 
been caused by a pellet of buckshot. So the entire police force 
of the province were on the lookout for a man with an injured 
nose, all the more so because Babu and Pailwan were credited 
with having committed most of the murders for which Sultana's 
gang were responsible. When he heard the orderly's story 
Freddy jumped into his car and dashed to the station— dashed 
is the right word, for when Freddy is in a hurry the road is 
before him and traffic and corners do not exist. At the station 
he placed guards at all the exits to the waiting room and then 
went up to the two men and asked them who they were. 
Merchants, they answered, on their way from Bareilly to the 
Punjab. Why then, asked Freddy, had they taken a train that 
terminated at Moradabad? He was told that there had been two 
trains at the Bareilly platform and they had been directed to 
the wrong one. When Freddy learnt the men had not had any 
food, and that they would have to wait until next morning for a 
connecting train, he invited them to accompany him and be his 
guests. For a moment the men hesitated, and then said, 'As you 
wish. Sahib'. 

With the two men in the back of the car Freddy drove slowly, 
closely questioning them, and to all his questions he received 
prompt answers. The men then asked Freddy if it was 
customary for sahibs to visit railway stations at night and carry 
off passengers, leaving their luggage to be plundered by any 
who cared to do so. Freddy knew that his action, without a duly 
executed warrant, could be described as high-handed and 
might land him in serious trouble if the members of Sultana's 
gang serving sentences In the Moradabad jail failed to identify 
their late companions. While these unpleasant thoughts were 
chasing each other through his mind, the car arrived at the 



bungalow in which he was putting up for the Police Week. All 
dogs love Freddy; and Sultana's dog was no exception. In the 
months that had passed this pye with a dash of terrier blood 
had given Freddy all his affection, and now, when the car 
stopped and the three men got out, the dog came dashing out 
of the bungalow, stopped in surprise, and then hurled himself 
at the two travellers with every manifestation of delight that a 
dog can exhibit. For a tense minute Freddy and the two men 
looked at each other in silence and then Pailwan, who knew the 
fate that awaited him, stooped down and patting the dog's head 
said, 'In face of this honest witness what use is it. Young Sahib, 
for us to deny we are the men you think we are'. Society 
demands protection against criminals, and Sultana was a 
criminal. He was tried under the law of the land, found guilty, 
and executed. Nevertheless, I cannot withhold a great measure 
of admiration for the little man who set at nought the might of 
the Government for three long years, and who by his brave 
demeanour won the respect of those who guarded him in the 
condemned cell. 

I could have wished that justice had not demanded that Sultana 
be exhibited in manacles and leg-irons, and exposed to ridicule 
from those who trembled at the mere mention of his name 
while he was at liberty. I could also have wished that he had 
been given a more lenient sentence, for no other reasons than 
that he had been branded a criminal at birth, and had not had a 
fair chance; that when power was in his hands he had not 
oppressed the poor; that when I tracked him to the banyan tree 
he spared my life and the lives of my friends. And finally, that 
he went to his meeting with Freddy, not armed with a knife or a 
revolver, but with a water melon in his hands. 



VIII - Loyalty 

THE mail train was running at its maximum speed of thirty 
miles per hour through country that was familiar. For mile upon 
mile the newly risen sun had been shining on fields where 
people were reaping the golden wheat, for it was the month of 
April and the train was passing through the Gangetic valley the 
most fertile land in India. 

During the previous year India had witnessed one of her worst 
famines. I had seen whole villages existing on the bark of trees; 
on minute grass seeds swept up with infinite labour from 
scorching plains; and on the wild plums that grow on waste 
lands too poor for the raising of crops. Mercifully the weather 
had changed, good winter rains had brought back fertility to 
the land, and the people who had starved for a year were now 
eagerly reaping a good harvest. Early though the hour was, the 
scene was one of intense activity in which every individual of 
the community had his, or her, allotted part. The reaping was 
being done by women, most of them landless labourers who 
move from area to area, as the crop ripens, and who for their 
labour— which starts at dawn and ends when there is no longer 
light to work by— receive one-twelfth to one-sixteenth of the 
crop they cut in the course of the day. 

There were no hedges to obstruct the view, and from the 
carriage window no mechanical device of any kind was to be 
seen. The ploughing had been done by oxen, two to a plough; 
the reaping was being done by sickles with a curved blade 
eighteen inches long; the sheaves, tied with twisted stalks of 
wheat straw, were being carted to the threshing floor on 
oxcarts with wooden wheels; and on the threshing floor, 
plastered over with cow dung, oxen were treading out the corn; 
they were tied to a long rope, one end of which was made fast 
to a pole firmly fixed in the ground. As a field was cleared of 
the sheaves children drove cattle on to it to graze on the 
stubble and amongst the cattle old and infirm women were 
sweeping the ground to recover any seed that had fallen from 



the ears when the wheat was being cut. Half of what these 
toilers collected would be taken by the owner of the field and 
the other half— which might amount to as much as a pound or 
two, if the ground was not too sun cracked— they would be 
permitted to retain. 

My journey was to last for thirty-six hours. I had the carriage to 
myself, and the train would stop for breakfast, lunch, and 
dinner. Every mile of the country through which the train was 
running was interesting; and yet I was not happy, for in the 
steel trunk under my seat was a string bag containing two 
hundred rupees which did not belong to me. Eighteen months 
previously I had taken employment as a Fuel Inspector with the 
railway on which I was now travelling. I had gone straight from 
school to this job, and for those eighteen months I had lived in 
the forest cutting five hundred thousand cubic feet of timber, to 
be used as fuel in locomotives. After the trees had been felled 
and billeted, each billet not more and not less than thirty-six 
inches long, the fuel was carted ten miles to the nearest point 
of the railway, where it was stacked and measured and then 
loaded into fuel trains and taken to the stations where it was 
needed. Those eighteen months alone in the forest had been 
strenuous, but I had kept fit and enjoyed the work. There was 
plenty of game in the forest in the way of chital, four-horned 
antelope, pig, and pea fowl, and in the river that formed one 
boundary of the forest there were several varieties of fish and 
many alligators and python. My work did not permit of my 
indulging in sport during daylight hours so I had to do all my 
shooting for the pot, and fishing, at night. Shooting by 
moonlight is very different from shooting in daylight, for 
though it is easier to stalk a deer or a rooting pig at night it is 
difficult to shoot accurately unless the moon can be got to 
shine on the foresight. The pea fowl had to be shot while they 
were roosting, and I am not ashamed to say that I occasionally 
indulged in this form of murder, for the only meat I ate during 
that year and a half was what I shot on moonlight nights; 
during the dark period of the moon I had perforce to be a 



vegetarian. 

The felling of the forest disarranged the normal life of the 
jungle folk and left me with the care of many waifs and 
orphans, all of whom had to share my small tent with me. It 
was when I was a bit crowded with two broods of partridges— 
one black and the other grey four pea fowl chicks, two 
leverets, and two baby four-horned antelope that could only 
just stand upright on their spindle legs, that Rex the python 
took up his quarters in the tent. I returned an hour after 
nightfall that day, and while I was feeding the four-footed 
inmates with milk I saw the lantern light glinting on something 
in a corner of the tent and on investigation found Rex coiled up 
on the straw used as a bed by the baby antelope. A hurried 
count revealed that none of the young inmates of the tent were 
missing, so I left Rex in the corner he had selected. For two 
months thereafter Rex left the tent each day to bask in the sun, 
returning to his corner at sundown, and during the whole of 
that period he never harmed any of the young life he shared 
the tent with. Of all the waifs and orphans who were brought 
up in the tent, and who were returned to the forest as soon as 
they were able to fend for themselves, Tiddley-de-winks, a four¬ 
horned antelope, was the only one who refused to leave me. 

She followed me when I moved camp to be nearer to the 
railway line to supervise the loading of the fuel, and in doing so 
nearly lost her life. Having been brought up by hand she had no 
fear of human beings and the day after our move she 
approached a man who, thinking she was a wild animal, tried 
to kill her. When I returned to the tent that evening I found her 
lying near my camp bed and on picking her up saw that both 
her forelegs had been broken, and that the broken ends of the 
bones had worked through the skin. While I was getting a little 
milk down her throat, and trying to summon sufficient courage 
to do what I knew should be done, my servant came into the 
tent with a man who admitted to having tried to kill the poor 
beast. It appeared that this man had been working in his field 
when Tiddley-de-winks went up to him, and thinking she had 



strayed in from the nearby forest, he struck her with a stick 
and then chased her; and it was only when she entered my tent 
that he realized she was a tame animal. My servant had 
advised him to leave before I returned, but this the man had 
refused to do. When he had told his story he said he would 
return early next morning with a bone-setter from his village. 
There was nothing I could do for the injured animal, beyond 
making a soft bed for her and giving her milk at short intervals, 
and at day break next morning the man returned with the 
bone-setter. It is unwise in India to judge from appearances. 

The bone-setter was a feeble old man, exhibiting in his person 
and tattered dress every sign of poverty, but he was none the 
less a specialist, and a man of few words. He asked me to lift 
up the injured animal, stood looking at her for a few minutes, 
and then turned and left the tent, saying over his shoulder that 
he would be back in two hours. I had worked week in week out 
for months on end so I considered I was justified in taking a 
morning off, and before the old man returned I had cut a 
number of stakes in the nearby jungle and constructed a small 
pen in a corner of the tent. The man brought back with him a 
number of dry jute stalks from which the bark had been 
removed, a quantity of green paste, several 

young castor-oil plant leaves as big as plates, and a roll of thin 
jute twine. When I had seated myself on the edge of the camp 
bed with Tiddley-de-winks across my knees, her weight partly 
supported by her hind legs and partly by my knees, the old man 
sat down on the ground in front of her with his materials within 
reach. 

The bones of both forelegs had been splintered midway 
between the knees and the tiny hooves, and the dangling 
portion of the legs had twisted round and round. Very gently 
the old man untwisted the legs, covered them from knee to 
hoof with a thick layer of green paste, laid strips of the castor- 
oil leaves over the paste to keep it in position, and over the 
leaves laid the jute stalks, binding them to the legs with jute 
twine. Next morning he returned with splints made of jute 



stalks strung together, and when they had been fitted to her 
legs Tiddley-de-winks was able to bend her knees and place her 
hooves, which extended an inch beyond the splints, on the 
ground. 

The bone-setter's fee was one rupee, plus two annas for the 
ingredients he had put in the paste and the twine he had 
purchased in the bazaar and not until the splints had been 
removed and the little antelope was able to skip about again 
would he accept either his fee or the little present I gratefully 
offered him. 

My work, every day of which I had enjoyed, was over now and I 
was on my way to headquarters to render an account of the 
money I had spent and, I feared, to look for another job; for the 
locomotives had been converted to coal-burning and no more 
wood fuel would be needed. My books were all in perfect order 
and I had the feeling that I had rendered good service, for I had 
done in eighteen months what had been estimated to take two 
years. Yet I was uneasy, and the reason for my being so was the 
bag of money in my steel trunk. 

I reached my destination, Samastipur, at 9 a.m. and after 
depositing my luggage in the waiting-room set out for the office 
of the head of the department I had been working for, with my 
account books and the bag containing the two hundred rupees. 
At the office I was told by a very imposing doorkeeper that the 
master was engaged, and that I would have to wait. It was hot 
in the open veranda, and as the minutes dragged by my 
nervousness increased, for an old railway hand who had helped 
me to make up my book shad warned me that to submit 
balanced accounts and then admit, as I had every intention of 
doing, that I had two hundred rupees in excess would land me 
in very great trouble. Eventually the door opened and av ery 
harassed-looking man emerged; and before the doorkeeper 
could close it, a voice from inside the room bellowed at me to 
come in. 


Ryles, the head of the Locomotive Department of the Bengal 



and North Western Railway; was a man weighing sixteen stone, 
with a voice that struck terror into all who served under him, 
and with a heart of gold. Bidding me sit down he drew my 
books towards him, summoned a clerk and very carefully 
checked my figures with those received from the stations to 
which the fuel had been sent. Then he told me he regretted my 
services would no longer be needed, said that discharge orders 
would be sent to me later in the day, and indicated that the 
interview was over. Having picked my hat off the floor I started 
to leave, but was called back and told I had forgotten to remove 
what appeared to be a bag of money that I had placed on the 
table. It was foolish of me to have thought I could just leave the 
two hundred rupees and walk away, but that was what I was 
trying to do when Ryles called me; so I went back to the table 
and told him that the money belonged to the Railway, and as I 
did not know how to account for it in my books, I had brought it 
to him. 'Your books are balanced', Ryles said, 'and if you have 
not faked your accounts I should like an explanation.' 

Tewari, the head clerk, had come into the room with a tray of 
papers and he stood behind Ryles's chair, with encouragement 
in his kindly old eyes, as I gave Ryles the following explanation. 
When my work was nearing completion, fifteen cart-men, who 
had been engaged to cart fuel from the forest to the railway 
line, came to me one night and stated they had received an 
urgent summons to return to their village, to harvest the crops. 
The fuel they had carted was scattered over a wide area, and 
as it would take several days to stack and measure it they 
wanted me to make a rough calculation of the amount due to 
them, as it was essential for them to start on their journey that 
night. It was a dark night and quite impossible for me to 
calculate the cubic contents of the fuel, so I told them I would 
accept their figures. Two hours later they returned, and within 
a few minutes of paying them, I heard their carts creaking 
away into the night. They left no address with me, and several 
weeks later, when the fuel was stacked and measured, I found 
they had underestimated the amount due to them by two 



hundred rupees. When I had told my story Ryles informed me 
that the Agent, Izat, was expected in Samastipur next day and 
that he would leave him to deal with me. Izat, Agent of three of 
the most flourishing railways in India, arrived next morning 
and at midday I received a summons to attend Ryles's office. 
Izat, a small dapper man with piercing eyes, was alone in the 
office when I entered it, and after complimenting me on having 
finished my job six months ahead of time he said Ryles had 
shown him my books and given him a report and that he 
wanted to ask one question. Why had I not pocketed the two 
hundred rupees, and said nothing about it? My answer to this 
question was evidently satisfactory, for that evening, while 
waiting at the station in a state of uncertainty, I received two 
letters, one from Tewari thanking me for my contribution of 
two hundred rupees to the Railway men's Widows' and 
Orphans' Fund, of which he was Honorary Secretary, and the 
other from Izat informing me that my services were being 
retained, and instructing me to report to Ryles for duty. 

For a year there after I worked up and down the railway on a 
variety of jobs, at times on the footplates of locomotives 
reporting on consumption of coal— a job I liked for I was 
permitted to drive the engines; at times as guard of goods 
trains, a tedious job, for the railway was short-handed and on 
many occasions I was on duty for forty-eight hours at a stretch; 
and at times as assistant storekeeper, or assistant station- 
master. And then one day I received orders to go to Mokameh 
Ghat and see Storrar, the Ferry Superintendent. The Bengal 
and North Western Railway runs through the Gangetic valley at 
varying distances from the Ganges river, and at several places 
branch line stake off from the main line and run down to the 
river and, by means of ferries, connect up with the broad gauge 
railways on the right bank. Mokameh Ghat on the right bank of 
the Ganges is the most important of these connexions. 

I left Samastipur in the early hours of the morning and at the 
branch-line terminus, Samaria Ghat, boarded the S.S. 
Gorakhpur. Storrar had been apprised of my visit but no reason 



had been given, and as I had not been told why I was to go to 
Mokameh Ghat, we spent the day partly in his house and partly 
in walking about the extensive sheds, in which there appeared 
to be a considerable congestion of goods. Two days later I was 
summoned to Gorakhpur, the headquarters of the railway, and 
informed that I had been posted to Mokameh Ghat as Trans¬ 
shipment Inspector, that my pay had been increased from one 
hundred to one hundred and fifty rupees per month, and that I 
was to take over the contract for handling goods a week later. 

So back to Mokameh Ghat I went, arriving on this occasion at 
night, to take up a job about which I knew nothing, and to take 
on a contract without knowing where to get a single labourer, 
and, most important of all, with a capital of only one hundred 
and fifty rupees, saved during my two and a half years' service. 

Storrar was not expecting me on this occasion, but he gave me 
dinner, and when I told him why I had returned we took our 
chairs on to the veranda, where a cool wind was blowing off the 
river, and talked late into the night. Storrar was twice my age 
and had been at Mokameh Ghat for several years. He was 
employed as Ferry Superintendent by the Bengal and North 
Western (metre-gauge) Railway, and was in charge of a fleet of 
steamers and barges that ferried passengers and metre-gauge 
wagons between Samaria Ghat and Mokameh Ghat. I learnt 
from him that eighty per cent, of the longdistance traffic on the 
Bengal and North Western Railway passed through Mokameh 
Ghat; and that each year, from March to September, congestion 
of goods traffic took place at Mokameh Ghat and caused 
serious loss to the Railway. 

The transfer of goods between the two railways at Mokameh 
Ghat, necessitated by a break of gauge, was done by a Labour 
Company which held the contract for handling goods 
throughout the length of the broad-gauge railway. In Storrar's 
opinion the indifference of this company to the interests of the 
metre- gauge railway, and the seasonal shortage of labour due 
to the harvesting of crops in the Gangetic valley, were the 



causes of the annual congestion. Having imparted this 
information, he very pertinently asked how I, a total stranger to 
the locality and without any capital— he brushed aside my 
hard-earned savings— proposed to accomplish what the Labour 
Company with all their resources had failed to do. The sheds at 
Mokameh Ghat, he added, were stacked to the roof with goods; 
there were four hundred wagons in the yard waiting to be 
unloaded, and a thousand wagons on the far side of the river 
waiting to be ferried across. 'My advice to you', he concluded, 

'is to catch the early steamer to Samaria Ghat and to go 
straight back to Gorakhpur. Tell the Railway you will have 
nothing to do with the handling contract.' I was up early next 
morning but I did not catch the steamer to Samaria Ghat. 
Instead, I went on a tour of inspection of the sheds and of the 
goods yard. Storrar had not over painted the picture: in fact 
the conditions were even worse than he had said they were, for 
in addition to the four hundred metre-gauge wagons there 
were the same number of broad-gauge wagons waiting to be 
unloaded. At a rough calculation I put the goods at Mokameh 
Ghat waiting to be dealt with at fifteen thousand tons, and I 
had been sent to clear up the mess. Well, I was not quite 
twenty-one years of age, and summer was starting, a season 
when all of us are a little bit mad. By the time I met Ram Saran 
I had made up my mind that I would take on the job, no matter 
what the result might be. Ram Saran was station-master at 
Mokameh Ghat, a post he had held for two years. He was 
twenty years older than I was, had an enormous jet black 
beard, and was the father of five children. He had been advised 
by telegram of my arrival, but had not been told that I was to 
take over the handling contract. 

When I gave him this bit of news his face beamed all over and 
he said, 'Good, Sir. Very good. We will manage.' My heart 
warmed towards Ram Saran on hearing that 'we', and up to his 
death, thirty-five years later, it never cooled. When I told 
Storrar over breakfast that morning that I had decided to take 
on the handling contract he remarked that fools never took 



good advice, but added that he would do all he could to help 
me, a promise he faithfully kept. In the months that followed he 
kept his ferry running day and night to keep me supplied with 
wagons. 

The journey from Gorakhpur had taken two days, so when I 
arrived at Mokameh Ghat I had five days in which to learn what 
my duties were, and to make arrangements for taking over the 
handling contract. The first two days I spent in getting 
acquainted with my staff which, in addition to Ram Saran, 
consisted of an assistant station-master, a grand old man by the 
name of Chatterji who was old enough to be my grandfather, 
sixty-five clerks, and a hundred shunters, pointsmen, and 
watchmen. My duties extended across the river to Samaria 
Ghat where I had a clerical and menial staff a hundred strong. 
The supervising of these two staffs, and the care of the goods 
in transit, was in itself a terrifying job and added to it was the 
responsibility of providing a labour force sufficient to keep the 
five hundred thousand tons of goods that passed through 
Mokameh Ghat annually flowing smoothly. 

The men employed by the big Labour Company were on piece 
work, and as all work at Mokameh Ghat was practically at a 
stand still, there were several hundred very discontented men 
sitting about the sheds, many of whom offered me their 
services when they heard that I was going to do the handling 
for the metre-gauge railway. I was under no agreement not to 
employ the Labour Company's men, but thought it prudent not 
to do so. However, I saw no reason why I should not employ 
their relatives, so on the first of the three days I had in hand I 
selected twelve men and appointed them headmen. Eleven of 
these headmen undertook to provide ten men each, to start 
with, for the handling of goods, and the twelfth undertook to 
provide a mixed gang of sixty men and women for the handling 
of coal. The traffic to be dealt with consisted of a variety of 
commodities, and this meant employing different castes to deal 
with the different classes of goods. So of the twelve headmen, 
eight were Hindus, two Mohammedans, and two men of the 



depressed class; and as only one of the twelve was literate I 
employed one Hindu and one Mohammedan clerk to keep their 
accounts. While one Labour Company was doing the work of 
both railways the interchange of goods had taken place from 
wagon to wagon. Now each railway was to unload its goods in 
the sheds, and reload from shed to wagon. For all classes of 
goods, excluding heavy machinery and coal, I was to be paid at 
the rate of Re 1-7-0 (equivalent to is. lid. at the rate of 
exchange then current) for every thousand maunds of goods 
unloaded from wagons to shed or loaded from shed to wagons. 
Heavy machinery and coal were one-way traffic and as these 
two commodities were to be trans-shipped from wagon to 
wagon and only one contractor could be employed for the 
purpose, the work was entrusted to me, and I was to receive Re 
1-4- 0 (is. 8d.) for unloading, and the same for loading, one 
thousand maunds. There are eighty pounds in a maund, and a 
thousand maunds therefore are equal to over thirty-five tons. 
These rates will appear incredible, but their accuracy can be 
verified by a reference to the records of the two railways. 

A call-over on the last evening revealed that I had eleven 
headmen, each with a gang of ten men, and one headman with 
a mixed gang of sixty men and women. This, together with the 
two clerks, completed my force. At daybreak next morning I 
telegraphed to Gorakhpur that I had assumed my duties as 
Trans-shipment Inspector, and had taken over the handling 
contract. 

Ram Saran's opposite number on the broad-gauge railway was 
an Irishman by the name of Tom Kelly. Kelly had been at 
Mokameh Ghat for some years and though he was very 
pessimistic of my success, he very sportingly offered to help me 
in every way he could. With the sheds congested with goods, 
and with four hundred wagons of each railway waiting to be 
unloaded, it was necessary to do something drastic to make 
room in the sheds and get the traffic moving, so I arranged 
with Kelly that I would take the risk of unloading a thousand 
tons of wheat on the ground outside the sheds and with the 



wagons so released clear a space in the sheds for Kelly to 
unload a thousand tons of salt and sugar. Kelly then with his 
empty wagons would clear a space in the sheds for me. This 
plan worked admirably. Fortunately for me it did not rain while 
my thousand tons of wheat were exposed to the weather, and in 
ten days we had not only cleared the accumulation in the sheds 
but also the accumulation of wagons. Kelly and I were then 
able to advise our respective headquarters to resume the 
booking of goods via Mokameh Ghat, which had been 
suspended for a fortnight. I took over the contract at the 
beginning of the summer, the season when traffic on Indian 
railways is at its heaviest, and as soon as booking was opened a 
steady stream of downwards traffic from the Bengal and North 
Western Railway and an equally heavy stream from the broad- 
gauge railway started pouring into Mokameh Ghat. The rates 
on which I had been given the contract were the lowest paid to 
any contractor in India, and the only way in which I could hope 
to keep my labour was by cutting it down to the absolute 
minimum and making it work harder in order that it would earn 
as much, or possibly a little more, than other labour on similar 
work. All the labour at Mokameh Ghat was on piece work, and 
at the end of the first week my men and I were overjoyed to 
find that they had earned, on paper, fifty per cent, more than 
the Labour Company's men had earned. When entrusting me 
with the contract the Railway promised to pay me weekly, and I 
on my part promised to pay my labour weekly. The Railway, 
however, when making their promise, failed to realize that by 
switching over from one handling contractor to another they 
would be raising complications for their Audit Department that 
would take time to resolve. For the Railway this was a small 
matter, but for me it was very different. My total capital on 
arrival at Mokameh Ghat had been one hundred and fifty 
rupees, and there was no one in all the world I could call on to 
help me with a loan, so until the Railway paid me I could not 
pay my men. 

I have entitled this story Loyalty and I do not think that anyone 



has ever received greater loyalty than I did, not only from my 
labour, but also from the railway staff, during those first three 
months that I was at Mokameh Ghat. Nor do I think that men 
have ever worked harder. The work started every morning, 
weekdays and Sundays alike, at 4 a.m., and continued without 
interruption up to 8 p.m. The clerks whose duty it was to check 
and tally the goods took their meals at different hours to avoid 
a stoppage of work and my men ate their food, which was 
brought to them by wives, mothers, or daughters, in the sheds. 
There were no trade unions or slaves and slave-drivers in those 
days and every individual was at liberty to work as many, or as 
few, hours as he or she wished to. And everyone worked 
cheerfully and happily; for no matter whether it was the 
procuring of more and better food and clothing for the family, 
the buying of a new ox to replace a worn-out one, or the 
paying-off of a debt, the incentive, without which no man can 
work his best, was there. My work and Ram Saran's did not 
end when the men knocked off work, for there was 
correspondence to attend to, and the next day's work to be 
planned and arranged for, and during those first three months 
neither of us spent more than four hours in bed each night. I 
was not twenty-one and as hard as nails, but Ram Saran was 
twenty years older and soft, and at the end of the three months 
he had lost a stone in weight but none of his cheerfulness. 

Lack of money was now a constant worry to me, and as week 
succeeded week the worry became a hideous nightmare that 
never left me. First the headmen and then the labourers 
pledged their cheap and pitiful bits of jewellery and now all 
credit had gone; and to make matters worse, the men of the 
Labour Company, who were jealous that my men had earned 
more than they did, were beginning to taunt my men. On 
several occasions ugly incidents were narrowly avoided, for 
semi-starvation had not impaired the loyalty of my men and 
they were willing to give battle to anyone who as much as 
hinted that I had tricked them into working for me, and that 
they would never see a pice of the money they had earned. The 



monsoon was late in coming that year and the red ball in the 
sky fanned by a wind from an unseen furnace, was making life 
a burden. At the end of a long and a very trying day I received 
a telegram from Samaria Ghat informing me that an engine had 
been derailed on the slipway that fed the barges on which 
wagons were ferried across to Mokameh Ghat. A launch 
conveyed me across the river and twice within the next three 
hours the engine was replaced on the track, with the aid of 
hand jacks, only to be derailed again. It was not until the wind 
had died down and the powdery sand could be packed under 
the wooden sleepers that the engine was re-railed for the third 
time, and the slipway again brought into use. Tired and worn 
out, and with eyes swollen and sore from the wind and sand, I 
had just sat down to my first meal that day when my twelve 
headmen filed into the room, and seeing my servant placing a 
plate in front of me, with the innate courtesy of Indians, filed 
out again. I then, as I ate my dinner, heard the following 
conversation taking place in the veranda. 

One of the headme: What was on the plate you put in front of 
the sahib? 

My servant: A chapati and a little dal. 

One of the headmen: Why only one chapati and a little dal? 

My servant: Because there is no money to buy more. 

One of the headmen: What else does the sahib eat? 

My servant: Nothing. 

After a short silence I heard the oldest of the headmen, a 
Mohammedan with a great beard dyed with henna, say to his 
companions, 'Go home. I will stay and speak to the sahib. 1 
When my servant had removed the empty plate the old 
headman requested permission to enter the room, and standing 
before me spoke as follows: 'We came to tell you that our 
stomachs have long been empty and that after tomorrow it 
would be no longer possible for us to work. But we have seen 



tonight that your case is as bad as ours and we will carry on as 
long as we have strength to stand. I will, with your permission, 
go now, sahib, and, for the sake of Allah, I beg you will do 
something to help us . 1 

Every day for weeks I had been appealing to headquarters at 
Gorakhpur for funds and the only reply I could elicit was that 
steps were being taken to make early payment of my bills. After 
the bearded headman left me that night I walked across to the 
Telegraph Office, where the telegraphist on duty was sending 
the report I submitted each night of the work done during the 
day, took a form off his table and told him to clear the line for 
an urgent message to Gorakhpur. It was then a few minutes 
after midnight and the message I sent read: 'Work at Mokameh 
Ghat ceases at midday today unless I am assured that twelve 
thousand rupees has been dispatched by morning train.' The 
telegraphist read the message over and looking up at me said: 
'If I have your permission I will tell my brother, who is on duty 
at this hour, to deliver the message at once and not wait until 
office hours in the morning.' Ten hours later, and with two 
hours of my ultimatum still to run, I saw a telegraph messenger 
hurrying towards me with a buff-coloured envelope in his hand. 
Each group of men he passed stopped work to stare after him, 
for everyone in Mokameh Ghat knew the purport of the 
telegram I had sent at midnight. 

After I had read the telegram the messenger, who was the son 
of my office peon, asked if the news was good; and when I told 
him it was good, he dashed off and his passage down the sheds 
was punctuated by shouts of delight. The money could not 
arrive until the following morning, but what did a few hours 
matter to those who had waited for long months? 

The pay clerk who presented himself at my office next day, 
accompanied by some of my men carrying a cash chest slung 
on a bamboo pole and guarded by two policemen, was a jovial 
Hindu who was as broad as he was long and who exuded good 
humour and sweat in equal proportions. I never saw him 



without a pair of spectacles tied across his forehead with red 
tape. Having settled himself on the floor of my office he drew 
on a cord tied round his neck and from somewhere deep down 
in his person pulled up a key He opened the cash chest, and 
lifted out twelve string-bags each containing one thousand 
freshly minted silver rupees. He licked a stamp, and stuck it to 
the receipt I had signed. Then, delving into a pocket that would 
comfortably have housed two rabbits, he produced an envelope 
containing bank notes to the value of four hundred and fifty 
rupees, my arrears of pay for three months. 

I do not think anyone has ever had as great pleasure in paying 
out money as I had when I placed a bag containing a thousand 
rupees into the hands of each of the twelve headmen, nor do I 
think men have ever received money with greater pleasure 
than they did. The advent of the fat pay clerk had relieved a 
tension that had become almost unbearable, and the occasion 
called for some form of celebration, so the remainder of the day 
was declared a holiday— the first my men and I had indulged in 
for ninety-five days. I do not know how the others spent their 
hours of relaxation. For myself, I am not ashamed to admit that 
I spent mine in sound and restful sleep. 

For twenty-one years my men and I worked the handling 
contract at Mokameh Ghat, and during the whole of that long 
period, and even when I was absent in France and in 
Waziristan during the 1914-18 war, the traffic flowed smoothly 
through the main outlet of the Bengal and North Western 
Railway with never a hitch. When we took over the contract, 
between four and five hundred thousand tons of goods were 
passing through Mokameh Ghat, and when I handed over to 
Ram Saran the traffic had increased to a million tons. 



IX - Budhu 

BUDHU was a man of the Depressed Class, and during all the 
years I knew him I never saw him smile: his life had been too 
hard and the iron had entered deep into his very soul. He was 
about thirty-five years of age, a tall gaunt man, with a wife and 
two young children, when he applied to me for work. At his 
request I put him on to trans-shipping coal from broad-gauge 
trucks to metre-gauge wagons at Mokameh Ghat, for in this 
task men and women could work together, and Budhu wanted 
his wife to work with him. The broad-gauge trucks and metre- 
gauge wagons stood opposite each other with a four-foot-wide 
sloping platform between, and the coal had to be partly 
shovelled and partly carried in baskets from the trucks into the 
wagons. The work was cruelly hard, for there was no covering 
to the platform. In winter the men and women worked in bitter 
cold, often wet with rain for days on end, and in summer the 
brick platform and the iron floors of the trucks and wagons 
blistered their bare feet. A shovel in the hands of a novice, 
working for his bread and the bread of his children, is a cruel 
tool. The first day's work leaves the hands red and sore and the 
back with an ache that is a torment. On the second day blisters 
form on the hands, and the ache in the back becomes an even 
greater torment. On the third day the blisters break and 
become septic, and the back can with difficulty be 
straightened. Thereafter for a week or ten days only guts, and 
plenty of them, can keep the sufferer at work— as I know from 
experience. 

Budhu and his wife went through all these phases, and often, 
when they had done sixteen hours' piece work and were 
dragging themselves to the quarters I had provided for them, I 
was tempted to tell them they had suffered enough and should 
look for other less strenuous work. But they were making good 
wages, better (Budhu said) than they had ever made before, so 
I let them carry on, and the day came when with hardened 
hands and backs that no longer ached they left their work with 
as brisk and as light a step as they had approached it. 



I had some two hundred men and women trans-shipping coal at 
that time, for the coal traffic was as heavy as it always was in 
the summer. India was an exporting country in those days, and 
the wagons that took the grain, opium, indigo, hides, and bones 
to Calcutta returned from the collieries in Bengal loaded with 
coal, five hundred thousand tons of which passed through 
Mokameh Ghat. 

One day Budhu and his wife were absent from work. Dhamari, 
the headman of the coal gang, informed me that Budhu had 
received a postcard the previous day and had left that morning 
with his family, saying he would return to work as soon as it 
was possible for him to do so. Two months later the family 
returned and reoccupied their quarters, and Budhu and his 
wife worked as industriously as they had always done. At about 
the same time the following year Budhu, whose frame had now 
filled out, and his wife, who had lost her haggard look, again 
absented themselves from work. On this occasion they were 
absent three months, and looked tired and worn out on their 
return. Except when consulted, or when information was 
voluntarily given, I never inquired into the private affairs of my 
work people, for Indians are sensitive on this point; so I did not 
know why Budhu periodically left his work which he invariably 
did after receiving a postcard. The post for the work people 
was delivered to the headmen and distributed by them to the 
men and women working under them, so I instructed Chamari 
to send Budhu to me the next time he received a card. Nine 
months later, when the coal traffic was unusually heavy and 
every man and woman in my employ was working to full 
capacity, Budhu, carrying a post card in his hand, presented 
himself at my office. The postcard was in a script that I could 
not read so I asked Budhu to read it to me. This he could not 
do, for he had not been taught to read and write, but he said 
Chamari had read it to him and that it was an order from his 
master to come at once as the crops were ready to harvest. The 
following was Budhu's story as he told it to me that day in my 
office, and his story is the story of millions of poor people in 



India. 


'My grandfather, who was a field labourer, borrowed two 
rupees from the bania of the village in which he lived. The 
bania retained one of the rupees as advance interest for one 
year, and made my grandfather put his thumb-mark to an entry 
in his bhai khata (register of account). When my grandfather 
was able to do so from time to time, he paid the bania a few 
annas by way of interest. On the death of my grandfather my 
father took over the debt, which then amounted to fifty rupees. 
During my father's lifetime the debt increased to one hundred 
and fifteen rupees. In the meantime the old bania died and his 
son, who reigned in his place, sent for me when my father died 
and informed me that as the family debt now amounted to a 
considerable sum it would be necessary for me to give him a 
stamped and duly executed document. This I did, and as I had 
no money to pay for the stamped paper and for the registration 
of the document the bania advanced the required amount and 
added it to the debt, which together with interest now 
amounted to one hundred and thirty rupees. As a special favour 
the bania consented to reduce the interest to twenty-five per 
cent. This favour he granted me on condition that my wife and I 
helped him each year to harvest his crops, until the debt was 
paid in full. This agreement, for my wife and I to work for the 
bania without wages, was written on another piece of paper to 
which I put my thumb-mark. For ten years my wife and I have 
helped to harvest the bania's crops, and each year after the 
bania has made up the account and entered it on the back of 
the stamped paper he takes my thumb impression on the 
document. I do not know how much the debt has increased 
since I took it over. For years I was not able to pay anything 
towards it, but since I have been working for you I have paid 
five, seven, and thirteen rupees— twenty-five rupees 
altogether.' Budhu had never dreamed of repudiating the debt. 
To repudiate a debt was unthinkable: not only would it blacken 
his own face, but, what was far worse, it would blacken the 
reputation of his father and grandfather. So he continued to 



pay what he could in cash and in labour, and lived on without 
hope of ever liquidating the debt; on his death, it would be 
passed on to his eldest son. 

Having elicited from Budhu the information that there was a 
Vakil 1 in the village in which the bania lived, and taken his 
name and address, I told Budhu to return to work and said I 
would see what could be done with the bania. Thereafter 
followed a long correspondence with an advocate, or lawyer. 
The Vakil, a stout-hearted Brahmin, who became a firm ally 
after the bania had insulted him by ordering him out of his 
house and telling him to mind his own business. From the Vakil 
I learnt that the bhai khata inherited by the bania from his 
father could not be produced in a court of law as evidence, for 
it bore the thumb-marks of men long since dead. The bania had 
tricked Budhu into executing a document which clearly stated 
that Budhu had borrowed one hundred and fifty rupees at a 
rate of twenty-five per cent, interest. The Vakil advised me not 
to contest the case for the document Budhu had executed was 
valid, and Budhu had admitted its validity by paying three 
installments as part interest, and putting his thumb- mark to 
these payments on the document. When I had sent the Vakil a 
money order in full satisfaction of the debt, plus interest at 
twenty-five per cent., the bania surrendered the legal 
document; but he refused to surrender the private agreement 
binding Budhu and his wife to work without wages on 
harvesting his crops. It was only when I threatened, on the 
Vakil's advice, to prosecute for extortion that he handed the 
agreement over to the Vakil. 

Budhu was very uneasy while these transactions were dragging 
on. He never spoke to me on the subject, but I could see from 
the way in which he looked at me whenever I passed him at 
work that he was speculating as to whether he had been wise 
in leaving me to deal with the all-powerful bania, and what his 
position would be if the bania suddenly appeared and 
demanded an explanation for his conduct. And then one day I 
received by registered post a heavily sealed letter containing a 



much thumb-marked legal document, an agreement also 
thumb-marked, a stamped receipt for the Vakil's fees, and a 
letter informing me that Budhu was now a free man. The whole 
transaction had cost me two hundred and twenty-five rupees. 

Budhu was leaving work that evening when I met him, took the 
documents out of the envelope, and told him to hold them while 
I set a match to them. 'No, Sahib, no', he said. 'You must not 
burn these papers, for I am now your slave and, God willing, I 
will one day pay off my debt to you.' Not only did Budhu never 
smile but he was also a very silent man. When I told him that, 
as he would not let me burn the papers, he could keep them, he 
only put his hands together and touched my feet; but when he 
raised his head and turned to walk away, tears were ploughing 
furrows down his coal-grimed face. 

Only one of millions freed of a debt that had oppressed three 
generations, but had the number been legion my pleasure 
could not have been greater, nor could any words have affected 
me more deeply than Budhu's mute gesture, and the tears that 
blinded him as he stumbled away to tell his wife that the 
bania's debt had been paid and that they were free. 



X - Lalajee 

THE passenger steamer was late in arriving from Samaria 
Ghat. I was standing on the landing stage, watching the 
passengers disembark and hurry up the ramp to the broad- 
gauge train, which I had arranged to detain a few minutes for 
them. Last to leave the steamer was a thin man with eyes sunk 
deep in their sockets, wearing a patched suit which in the days 
of long ago had been white, and carrying a small bundle tied up 
in a coloured handkerchief. By clutching the handrail of the 
gangway for support, he managed to gain the landing stage, 
but he turned off at the ramp, walked with slow and feeble 
steps to the edge of the river, and was violently and repeatedly 
sick. Having stooped to wash his face, he opened his bundle, 
took from it a sheet, spread it on the bank, and lay down with 
the Ganges water lapping the soles of his feet. Evidently he had 
no intention of catching the train, for when the warning bell 
rang and the engine whistled, he made no movement. He was 
lying on his back, and when I told him he had missed his train 
he opened his sunken eyes to look up at me and said, 'I have no 
need of trains. Sahib, for I am dying'. 

It was the mango season, the hottest time of the year, when 
cholera is always at its worst. When the man passed me at the 
foot of the gangway I suspected he was suffering from cholera, 
and my suspicions were confirmed when I saw him being 
violently sick. In reply to my questions the man said he was 
travelling alone, and had no friends at Mokameh Ghat, so I 
helped him to his feet and led him the two hundred yards that 
separated my bungalow from the Ganges. Then I made him 
comfortable in my punkah coolie's house, which was empty, and 
detached from the servants' quarters. I had been at Mokameh 
Ghat ten years, employing a large labour force. Some of the 
people lived under my supervision in houses provided by me, 
and the balance lived in surrounding villages. I had seen 
enough of cholera among my own people and also among the 
villagers to make me pray that if I ever contracted the hateful 
and foul disease some Good Samaritan would take pity on me 



and put a bullet through my head, or give me an overdose of 
opium. Few will agree with me that of the tens of thousands of 
people reported as having died of cholera each year at least 
half die not of cholera but of fear. We, who live in India, as 
distinct from those who visit the country for a longer or shorter 
period, are fatalists, believing that a man cannot die before his 
allotted time. This, however, does not mean that we are 
indifferent to epidemic diseases. Cholera is dreaded throughout 
the land, and when it comes in epidemic form as many die of 
stark fear as die of the actual disease. There was no question 
that the man in my punkah coolie's house was suffering from a 
bad attack of cholera and if he was to survive, his faith and my 
crude treatment alone would pull him through; for the only 
medical aid within miles was a brute of a doctor, as callous as 
he was inefficient, and whose fat oily throat I am convinced I 
should have one day had the pleasure of cutting had not a 
young probationer clerk, who had been sent to me to train, 
found a less messy way of removing this medico who was hated 
by the whole staff. This young hopeful gained the confidence of 
the doctor and of his wife, both of whom were thoroughly 
immoral, and who confided to the clerk that they greatly 
missed the fleshpots of Egypt and the pleasures they had 
enjoyed before coming to Mokameh Ghat. This information set 
the clerk thinking, and a few nights later, and a little before the 
passenger steamer was due to leave for Samaria Ghat, a letter 
was delivered to the doctor, on reading which he told his wife 
that he had been summoned to Samaria Ghat to attend an 
urgent case and that he would be absent all night. He spruced 
himself up before leaving the house, was met outside by the 
clerk, and conducted in great secrecy to an empty room at the 
end of a block of buildings in which one of my pointsmen had 
died a few nights previously of coal-gas poisoning. 

After the doctor had been waiting some time in the room, 
which had a single solid door and a small grated window, the 
door opened to admit a heavily veiled figure and was then 
pulled to and locked on the outside. 



I was returning late that night through the goods sheds and 
overheard part of a very animated conversation between the 
probationer clerk and a companion he was relieving on night 
duty. Next morning on my way to work I saw a crowd of men in 
front of the late pointsman's quarters and was informed, by a 
most innocent-looking spectator, that there appeared to be 
someone inside, though the door was padlocked on the outside. 
I told my informant to get a hammer and break the lock off and 
hurried away on my lawful occasions, for I had no desire to 
witness the discomfiture, richly as it was deserved, of the man 
and his wife when the door was broken open. Three entries 
appear in my diary for that date: '(i) Doctor and his wife left on 
urgent private affairs. (2) Shiv Deb probationer confirmed as a 
Tally Clerk on salary of twenty rupees per month. (3) Lock, 
points, alleged to have been run over by engine, replaced by 
new one.' And that was the last Mokameh Ghat ever saw of the 
man who was a disgrace to the honourable profession he 
claimed to belong to. I could not spare much time to nurse the 
thin man for I already had three cholera patients on my hands. 
From my servants I could expect no help, for they were of a 
different caste to the sufferer, and further, there was no 
justification for exposing them to the risk of infection. However, 
this did not matter, provided I could instil sufficient confidence 
into the man that my treatment was going to make him well. To 
this end I made it very clear to him that I had not brought him 
into my compound to die, and to give me the trouble of 
cremating him, but to make him well, and that it was only with 
his co-operation that this could be effected. That first night I 
feared that in spite of our joint efforts he would die, but 
towards morning he rallied and from then on his condition 
continued to improve and all that remained to be done was to 
build up his strength, which cholera drains out of the human 
body more quickly than any other disease. At the end of a week 
he was able to give me his story. 

He was a Lala, a merchant, and at one time possessed a 
flourishing grain business; then he made the mistake of taking 



as partner a man about whom he knew nothing. For a few years 
the business prospered and all went well, but one day when he 
returned from a long journey he found the shop empty and his 
partner gone. The little money in his possession was only 
sufficient to meet his personal debts, and bereft of credit he 
had to seek employment. This he found with a merchant with 
whom he had traded, and for ten years he had worked on seven 
rupees a month, which was only sufficient to support himself 
and his son— his wife having died shortly after his partner 
robbed him. He was on his way from Muzaffarpur to Gaya, on 
his master's business, when he was taken ill in the train. As he 
got worse on board the ferry steamer, he had crawled ashore to 
die on the banks of the sacred Ganges. 

Lalajee— I never knew him by any other name— stayed with 
me for about a month, and then one day he requested 
permission to continue his journey to Gaya. The request was 
made as we were walking through the sheds, for Lalajee was 
strong enough now to accompany me for a short distance each 
morning when I set out for work, and when I asked him what 
he would do if on arrival at Gaya he found his master had filled 
his place, he said he would try to find other employment. 'Why 
not try to get someone to help you to be a merchant again?' I 
asked; and he replied: 'The thought of being a merchant once 
again, and able to educate my son, is with me night and day. 
Sahib, but there is no one in all the world who would trust me, 
a servant on seven rupees a month and without any security to 
offer, with the five hundred rupees I should need to give me a 
new start.' The train for Gaya left at 8 p.m. and when that 
evening I returned to the bungalow a little before that hour, I 
found Lalajee with freshly washed clothes, and a bundle in his 
hand a little bigger than the one he had arrived with, waiting in 
the veranda to say goodbye to me. When I put a ticket for Gaya 
and five one- hundred rupee notes into his hand he, like the 
man with the coal-grimed face, was tongue tied. All he could do 
was to keep glancing from the notes in his hand to my face, 
until the bell that warned passengers the train would leave in 



five minutes rang; then, putting his head on my feet, he said: 
'Within one year your slave will return you this money. 1 

And so Lalajee left me, taking with him the greater part of my 
savings. That I would see him again I never doubted, for the 
poor of India never forget a kindness; but the promise Lalajee 
had made was, I felt sure, beyond his powers of 
accomplishment. In this I was wrong, for returning late one 
evening I saw a man dressed in spotless white standing in my 
veranda. The light from the room behind him was in my eyes, 
and I did not recognize him until he spoke. It was Lalajee, come 
a few days before the expiry of the time limit he had set 
himself. That night as he sat on the floor near my chair he told 
me of his trading transactions, and the success that had 
attended them. Starting with a few bags of grain and being 
content with a profit of only four annas per bag he had 
gradually, and steadily, built up his business until he was able 
to deal in consignments up to thirty tons in weight, on which he 
was making a profit of three rupees per ton. His son was in a 
good school, and as he could now afford to keep a wife he had 
married the daughter of a rich merchant of Patna; all this he 
had accomplished in a little under twelve months. As the time 
drew near for his train to leave he laid five one-hundred rupee 
notes on my knee. Then, he took a bag from his pocket, held it 
out to me and said, 'This is the interest, calculated at twenty- 
five per cent., that I owe you on the money you lent me'. I 
believe I deprived him of half the pleasure he had anticipated 
from his visit when I told him it was not our custom to accept 
interest from our friends. Before leaving me Lalajee said, 
'during the month 1 stayed with you I had talks with your 
servants, and with your workmen, and I learnt from them that 
there was a time when you were reduced to one chapati and a 
little dal. If such a time should ever come again, which 
Parmeshwar forbid, your slave will place all that he has at your 
feet.' Until I left Mokameh Ghat, eleven years later, I received 
each year a big basket of the choicest mangoes from Lala-jee's 
garden, for he attained his ambition of becoming a merchant 



once again, and returned to the home he had left when his 
partner robbed him. 



XI - Chamari 

CHAMARI, as his name implies, belonged to the lowest strata 
of India's sixty million Untouchables. Accompanied by his wife, 
an angular person whose face was stamped with years of 
suffering and whose two young children were clutching her 
torn skirts, he applied to me for work. Chamari was an 
undersized man with a poor physique, and as he was not strong 
enough to work in the sheds I put him and his wife on to trans¬ 
shipping coal. Next morning I provided the pair of them with 
shovels and baskets, and they started work with courage and 
industry far beyond their strength. Towards evening I had to 
put others on to finishing their task, for the delay in unloading 
one of a rake of fifty wagons meant hanging up the work of 
several hundred labourers. For two days Chamari and his wife 
laboured valiantly but ineffectively. On the third morning when, 
their blistered hands tied up in dirty rags, they were waiting 
for work to be allotted to them I asked Chamari if he could read 
and write. When he said that he knew a little Hindi, I instructed 
him to return the shovels and baskets to the store and to come 
to my office for orders. A few days previously I had discharged 
the headman of the coal gang for his inability to keep sober— 
the only man I ever discharged— and as it was quite evident 
that neither Chamari nor his wife would be able to make a 
living at the job they were on, I decided to give Chamari a trial 
as a headman. 

Chamari thought he had been summoned to the office to be 
sacked and was greatly relieved, and very proud, when I 
handed him a new account book and a pencil and told him to 
take down the numbers of the rake of broad-gauge wagons 
from which coal was being unloaded, together with the names 
of the men and women who were engaged on each wagon. Half 
an hour later he returned with the information I had asked for, 
neatly entered in the book. When I had verified the correctness 
of these entries I handed the book back to Chamari, told him I 
had appointed him headman of the coal gang, at that time 
numbering two hundred men and women, and explained his 



duties to him in detail. A humble man who one short hour 
earlier had laboured under all the disqualifications of his lowly 
birth walked out of my office with a book tucked under his arm, 
a pencil behind his ear and, for the first time in his life, his 
head in the air. Chamari was one of the most conscientious and 
hardworking men I have ever employed. In the gang he 
commanded there were men and women of all castes including 
Brahmins, Chattris, and Thakurs, and never once did he offend 
by rendering less respect to these high-caste men and women 
than was theirs by birthright, and never once was his authority 
questioned. He was responsible for keeping the individual 
accounts of everyone working under him, and during the 
twenty years he worked for me the correctness of his accounts 
was never disputed. 

On Sunday evenings Chamari and I would sit, he on a mat and I 
on a stool, with a great pile of copper pice between us, and 
ringed round by coal-grimed men and women eagerly waiting 
for their week's wages. I enjoyed those Sunday evenings as 
much as did the simple hardworking people sitting round me, 
for my pleasure in giving them the wages they had earned with 
the sweat of their brows was as great as theirs in receiving 
them. 

During the week they worked on a platform half a mile long, 
and as some of them lived in the quarters I had built for them, 
while others lived in the surrounding villages, they had little 
opportunity for social intercourse. Sunday evenings gave them 
this opportunity, and they took full advantage of it. 

Hardworking people are always cheerful, for they have no time 
to manufacture imaginary troubles, which are always worse 
than real ones. My people were admittedly poor, and they had 
their full share of troubles; none the less they were full of good 
cheer, and as I could understand and speak their language as 
well as they could, I was able to take part in their light-hearted 
banter and appreciate all their jokes. The railway paid me by 
weight and I paid my people, both those who worked in the 
sheds and those who worked on the coal platform, at wagon 



rates. For work in the sheds I paid the headmen, who in turn 
paid the gangs employed by them, but the men and women 
working on coal were paid individually by me. Chamari would 
change the currency notes I gave him for pice in the Mokameh 
bazaar, and then, on Sunday evenings, as we sat with the pile 
of pice between us he would read out the names of the men 
and women who had been engaged on unloading every 
individual wagon during the week, while I made a quick mental 
calculation and paid the amount due to each worker. I paid 
forty pice (ten annas) for the unloading of each wagon, and 
when the pice would not divide up equally among the number 
that had been engaged on unloading any particular wagon I 
gave the extra pice to one of their number, who would later 
purchase salt to be divided among them. This system of 
payment worked to the satisfaction of everyone, and though the 
work was hard, and the hours long, the wage earned was three 
times as much as could be earned on field work, and further, 
my work was permanent while field work was seasonal and 
temporary. 

I started Chamari on a salary of fifteen rupees a month and 
gradually increased it to forty rupees, which was more than the 
majority of the clerks employed by the railway were getting, 
and in addition I allowed him to employ a gang of ten men to 
work in the sheds. In India a man's worth is assessed, to a 
great extent, by the money he is earning and the use he makes 
of it. Chamari was held in great respect by all sections of the 
community for the good wages he was earning, but he was held 
in even greater respect for the unobtrusive use he made of his 
money. Having known hunger he made it his business to see 
that no one whom he could succour suffered as he had 
suffered. All of his own lowly caste who passed his door were 
welcome to share his food, and those whose caste prohibited 
them from eating the food cooked by his wife were provided 
with material to enable them to prepare their own food. When 
at his wife's request I spoke to Chamari on the subject of 
keeping open house, his answer invariably was that he and his 



family had found the fifteen rupees per month, on which I had 
engaged him, sufficient for their personal requirements and 
that to allow his wife more than that sum now would only 
encourage her to be extravagant. When I asked what form her 
extravagance was likely to take he said she was always nagging 
him about his clothes and telling him he should be better 
dressed than the men who were working under him, whereas 
he thought money spent on clothes could be better spent on 
feeding the poor. Then to clinch the argument he said: 'Look at 
yourself, Maharaj, 1 — he had addressed me thus from the first 
day, and continued so to address me to the end— 'you have 
been wearing that suit for years, and if you can do that, why 
can't I?' As a matter of fact he was wrong about the suit, for I 
had two of the same material, one being cleaned of coal dust 
while the other was in use. 

I had been at Mokameh Ghat sixteen years when Kaiser 
Wilhelm started his war. The railway opposed my joining up but 
gave their consent when I agreed to retain the contract. It was 
impossible to explain the implications of the war to my people 
at the conference to which I summoned them. However, each 
and every one of them was willing to carry on during my 
absence, and it was entirely due to their loyalty and devotion 
that traffic through Mokameh Ghat flowed smoothly and 
without a single hitch during the years I was serving, first in 
France, and later in Waziristan. Ram Saran acted as Trans¬ 
shipment Inspector during my absence, and when I returned 
after four years I resumed contact with my people with the 
pleasant feeling that I had only been away from them for a day. 
My safe return was attributed by them to the prayers they had 
offered up for me in temple and mosque, and at private shrines. 

The summer after my return from the war cholera was bad 
throughout Bengal, and at one time two women and a man of 
the coal gang were stricken down by the disease. Chamari and 
I nursed the sufferers by turns, instilling confidence into them, 
and by sheer will power brought them through. Shortly 
thereafter I heard someone moving in my veranda one night— I 



had the bungalow to myself, for Storrar had left on promotion— 
and on my asking, who it was, a voice out of the darkness said, 

'I am Chamari's wife. I have come to tell you that he has 
cholera'. Telling the woman to wait I hastily donned some 
clothes, lit a lantern, and set off with her armed with astick, for 
Mokameh Ghat was infested with poisonous snakes. 

Chamari had been at work all that day and in the afternoon had 
accompanied me to a nearby village in which a woman of his 
coal gang, by the name of Parbatti, was reported to be 
seriously ill. Parbatti, a widow with three children, was the first 
woman to volunteer to work for me when I arrived at Mokameh 
Ghat and for twenty years she had worked unflaggingly. Always 
cheerful and happy and willing to give a helping hand to any 
who needed it, she was the life and soul of the Sunday evening 
gatherings, for, being a widow, she could bandy words with all 
and sundry without offending India's very strict Mother 
Grundy. 

The boy who brought me the news that she was ill did not know 
what ailed her, but was convinced that she was dying, so I 
armed myself with a few simple remedies and calling for 
Chamari on the way hurried to the village. We found Parbatti 
lying on the floor of her hut with her head in her grey-haired 
mother's lap. It was the first case of tetanus I had ever seen, 
and I hope the last I shall ever see. Parbatti's teeth, which 
would have made the fortune of a film star, had been broken in 
an attempt to lever them apart, to give her water. She was 
conscious, but unable to speak, and the torments she was 
enduring are beyond any words of mine to describe. There was 
nothing I could do to give her relief beyond massaging the 
tense muscles of her throat to try to ease her breathing, and 
while I was doing this, her body was convulsed as though she 
had received an electric shock. Mercifully her heart stopped 
beating, and her sufferings ended. Chamari and I had no words 
to exchange as we walked away from the humble home in 
which preparations were already under way for the cremation 
ceremony, for though an ocean of prejudices had lain between 



the high-caste woman and us it had made no difference to our 
affection for her, and we both knew that we would miss the 
cheerful hardworking little woman more than either of us cared 
to admit. I had not seen Chamari again that evening, for work 
had taken me to Samaria Ghat; and now his wife had come to 
tell me he was suffering from cholera. 

We in India loathe and dread cholera but we are not frightened 
of infection, possibly because we are fatalists, and I was not 
surprised therefore to find a number of men squatting on the 
floor round Chamari's string bed. The room was dark, but he 
recognized me in the light of the lantern I was carrying and 
said, 'Forgive the woman for having called you at this hour.'— it 
was 2 a.m.— 'I ordered her not to disturb you until morning, 
and she disobeyed me.' Chamari had left me, apparently in 
good health, ten hours previously and I was shocked to see the 
change those few hours had made in his appearance. Always a 
thin, lightly built man, he appeared to have shrunk to half his 
size; his eyes had sunk deep into their sockets, and his voice 
was weak and little more than a whisper. It was oppressively 
hot in the room, so I covered his partly naked body with a sheet 
and made the men carry the bed out into the open courtyard. It 
was a public place for a man suffering from cholera to be in, 
but better a public place than a hot room in which there was 
not sufficient air for a man in his condition to breathe. Chamari 
and I had fought many cases of cholera together and he knew, 
none better, the danger of panicking and the necessity for 
unbounded faith in the simple remedies at my command. 
Heroically he fought the foul disease, never losing hope and 
taking everything I offered him to combat the cholera and 
sustain his strength. Hot as it was, he was cold, and the only 
way I was able to maintain any heat in his body was by placing 
a brazier with hot embers under his bed, and getting helpers to 
rub powdered ginger into the palms of his hands and the soles 
of his feet. For forty- eight hours the battle lasted, every minute 
being desperately contested with death, and then the gallant 
little man fell into a coma, his pulse fading out and his 



breathing becoming hardly perceptible. From midnight to a 
little after 4 a.m. he lay in this condition, and I knew that my 
friend would never rally. Hushed people who had watched with 
me during those long hours were either sitting on the ground 
or standing round when Chamari suddenly sat up and in an 
urgent and perfectly natural voice said, 'Maharaj, Maharaj! 
Where are you? 1 I was standing at the head of the bed, and 
when I leant forward and put my hand on his shoulder he 
caught it in both of his and said, 'Maharaj, Parmeshwar is 
calling me, and I must go'. Then, putting his hands together 
and bowing his head, he said, 'Parmeshwar, I come'. He was 
dead when I laid him back on the bed. 

Possibly a hundred people of all castes were present and heard 
Chamari's last words, and among them was a stranger, with 
sandalwood caste-marks on his forehead. When I laid the 
wasted frame down on the bed the stranger asked who the 
dead man was and, when told that he was Chamari, said: 'I 
have found what I have long been searching for. I am a priest of 
the great Vishnu temple at Kashi. My master the head priest, 
hearing of the good deeds of this man, sent me to find him and 
take him to the temple that he might have darshan of him. And 
now I will go back to my master and tell him Chamari is dead, 
and I will repeat to him the words I heard Chamari say.' Then, 
having laid the bundle he was carrying on the ground, and 
slipped off his sandals, this Brahmin priest approached the foot 
of the bed and made obeisance to the dead Untouchable. 

There will never again be a funeral like Chamari's at Mokameh 
Ghat, for all sections of the community, high and low, rich and 
poor, Hindu, Mohammedan, Untouchable, and Christian, turned 
out to pay their last respects to one who had arrived friendless 
and weighed down with disqualifications, and who left 
respected by all and loved by many. Chamari was a heathen, 
according to our Christian belief, and the lowest of India's 
Untouchables, but if I am privileged to go where he has gone, I 
shall be content. 



XII - Life at Mokameh Ghat 

MY men and I did not spend all our time at Mokameh Ghat 
working and sleeping. Work at the start had been very 
strenuous for all of us, and continued to be so, but as time 
passed and hands hardened and back-muscles developed, we 
settled down in our collars, and as we were pulling in the same 
direction with a common object— better conditions for those 
dependent on us— work moved smoothly and allowed of short 
periods for recreation. The reputation we had earned for 
ourselves by clearing the heavy accumulation of goods at 
Mokameh Ghat, and thereafter keeping the traffic moving, was 
something that all of us had contributed towards, and all of us 
took a pride in having earned this reputation and were 
determined to retain it. When therefore an individual absented 
himself to attend to private affairs, his work was cheerfully 
performed by his companions. 

One of my first undertakings, when I had a little time to myself 
and a few rupees in my pocket, was to start a school for the 
sons of my workmen, and for the sons of the lower paid railway 
staff. The idea originated with Ram Saran, who was a keen 
educationist, possibly because of the few opportunities he 
himself had had for education. Between us we rented a hut, 
installed a master, and the school— known ever afterwards as 
Ram Saran's School— started with a membership of twenty 
boys. Caste prejudices were the first snag we ran up against, 
but our master soon circumnavigated it by removing the sides 
of the hut. For whereas high- and low-caste boys could not sit 
together in cold brittle air the same hut, there was no objection 
to their sitting in the same shed. From the very start the school 
was a great success, thanks entirely to Ram Saran's unflagging 
interest. When suitable buildings had been erected, an 
additional seven masters employed, and the students increased 
to two hundred, the Government relieved us of our financial 
responsibilities. They raised the school to the status of a Middle 
School and rewarded Ram Saran, to the delight of all his 
friends, by conferring on him the title of Rai Sahib. 



Tom Kelly; Ram Saran's opposite number on the broad-gauge 
railway was a keen sportsman, and he and I started a 
recreation club. We cleared a plot of ground, marked out a 
football and a hockey ground, erected goal-posts, purchased a 
football and hockey sticks, and started to train each his own 
football and hockey team. The training for football was 
comparatively easy, but not so the training for hockey, for as 
our means did not run to the regulation hockey stick we 
purchased what at that time was known as a Khalsa stick: this 
was made in the Punjab from a blackthorn or small oak tree, 
the root being bent to a suitable angle to form the crook. The 
casualties at the start were considerable, for 98 per cent, of the 
players were bare footed, the sticks were heavy and devoid of 
lapping, and the ball used was made of wood. When our teams 
had learnt the rudiments of the two games, which amounted to 
no more than knowing in which direction to propel the ball, we 
started inter-railway matches. 

The matches were enjoyed as much by the spectators as by us 
who took part in them. Kelly was stouter than he would have 
admitted to being and always played in goal for his side, or for 
our team when we combined to play out- station teams. 

I was thin and light and played centre forward and was greatly 
embarrassed when I was accidentally tripped up by foot or by 
hockey stick, for when this happened all the players, with the 
exception of Kelly, abandoned the game to set me on my feet 
and dust my clothes. On one occasion while I was receiving 
these attentions, one of the opposing team dribbled the ball 
down the field and was prevented from scoring a goal by the 
spectators, who impounded the ball and arrested the player! 

Shortly after we started the recreation club the Bengal and 
North Western Railway built a club house and made a tennis 
court for their European staff which, including myself, 
numbered four. Kelly was made an honorary member of the 
club, and a very useful member he proved, for he was good at 
both billiards and tennis. Kelly and I were not able to indulge in 



tennis more than two or three times a month, but when the 
day's work was done we spent many pleasant evenings 
together playing billiards. 

The goods sheds and sidings at Mokameh Ghat were over a 
mile and a half long, and to save Kelly unnecessary walking his 
railway provided him with a rail trolly and four men to push it. 
This trolly was a great joy to Kelly and myself, for during the 
winter months, when the barheaded and greylag geese were in, 
and the moon was at or near the full, we trolled down the main 
line for nine miles to where there were a number of small 
tanks. These tanks, some of which were only a few yards across 
while others were an acre or more in extent, were surrounded 
by lentil crops which gave us ample cover. We timed ourselves 
to arrive at the tanks as the sun was setting, and shortly after 
we had taken up our positions— Kelly at one of the tanks and I 
at another— we would see the geese coming. 

The geese, literally tens of thousands of them, spent the day on 
the islands in the Ganges and in the evening left the islands to 
feed on the weeds in the tanks, or on the ripening wheat and 
grain crops beyond. After crossing the railway line, which was 
half-way between our positions and the Ganges, the geese 
would start losing height, and they passed over our heads 
within easy range. Shooting by moonlight needs a little 
practice, for birds flighting overhead appear to be farther off 
than they actually are and one is apt to fire too far ahead of 
them. When this happened, the birds, seeing the flash of the 
gun and hearing the report, sprang straight up in the air and 
before they flattened out again were out of range of the second 
barrel. Those winter evenings when the full moon was rising 
over the palm-trees that fringed the river, and the cold brittle 
air throbbed and reverberated with the honking of geese and 
the swish of their wings as they passed overhead in flights of 
from ten to a hundred, are among the happiest of my 
recollections of the years I spent at Mokameh Ghat. 

My work was never dull, and time never hung heavy on my 



hands, for in addition to arranging for the crossing of the 
Ganges, and the handling at Mokameh Ghat of a million tons of 
goods, I was responsible for the running of the steamers that 
ferried several hundred thousand passengers annually between 
the two banks of the river. The crossing of the river, which after 
heavy rains in the Himalayas was four to five miles wide, was 
always a pleasure to me, not only because it gave me time to 
rest my legs and have a quiet smoke but also because it gave 
me an opportunity of indulging in one of my hobbies— the 
study of human beings. The ferry was a link between two great 
systems of railways, one radiating north and the other 
radiating south, and among the seven hundred passengers who 
crossed at each trip were people from all parts of India, and 
from countries beyond her borders. One morning I was leaning 
over the upper deck of the steamer watching the third-class 
passengers taking their seats on the lower deck. With me was a 
young man from England who had recently joined the railway, 
and who had been sent to me to study the system of work at 
Mokameh Ghat. He had spent a fortnight with me and I was 
now accompanying him across the river to Samaria Ghat to see 
him off on his long railway journey to Gorakh-pur. Sitting cross- 
legged, or tailor wise, on a bench next to me and also looking 
down on the lower deck was an Indian. Crosthwaite, my young 
companion, was very enthusiastic about everything in the 
country in which he had come to serve, and as we watched the 
chattering crowds accommodating themselves on the open 
deck he remarked that he would dearly love to know who these 
people were, and why they were travelling from one part of 
India to another. The crowd, packed like sardines, had now 
settled down, so I said I would try to satisfy his curiosity. Let us 
start, I said, at the right and work round the deck, taking only 
the outer fringe of people who have their backs to the rail. The 
three men nearest to us are Brahmins, and the big copper 
vessels, sealed with wet clay, that they are so carefully 
guarding, contain Ganges water. The water on the right bank of 
the Ganges is considered to be more holy than the water on the 
left bank and these three Brahmins, servants of a well-known 



Maharaja, have filled the vessels on the right bank and are 
taking the water eighty miles by river and rail for the personal 
use of the Maharaja who, even when he is travelling, never 
uses any but Ganges water for domestic purposes. The man 
next to the Brahmins is a Mohammedan, a dhoonia by 
profession. He travels from station to station teasing the cotton 
in old and lumpy mattresses with the harp-like implement lying 
on the deck beside him. With this implement he teases old 
cotton until it resembles floss silk. Next to him are two Tibetan 
lamas who are returning from a pilgrimage to the sacred 
Buddhist shrine at Gaya, and who, even on this winter morning, 
are feeling hot, as you can see from the beads of sweat 
standing out on their foreheads. Next to the lamas are a group 
of four men returning from a pilgrimage to Benares, to their 
home on the foothills of Nepal. Each of the four men, as you 
can see, has two blown-glass jars, protected with wickerwork, 
slung to a short bamboo pole. These jars contain water which 
they have drawn from the Ganges at Benares and which they 
will sell drop by drop in their own and adjoining villages for 
religious ceremonies. 

And so on round the deck until I came to the last man on the 
left. This man, I told Crosthwaite, was an old friend of mine, 
the father of one of my workmen, who was crossing the river to 
plough his field on the left bank. 

Crosthwaite listened with great interest to all I had told him 
about the passengers on the lower deck, and he now asked me 
who the man was who was sitting on the bench near us. 'Oh', I 
said, 'he is a Mohammedan gentleman. A hide merchant on his 
way from Gaya to Muzaffarpur.' As I ceased speaking the man 
on the bench unfolded his legs, placed his feet on the deck and 
started laughing. Then turning tome he said in perfect English, 
'I have been greatly entertained listening to the description you 
have given your friend of the men on the deck below us, and 
also of your description of me. My tan hid my blushes, for I had 
assumed that he did not know English. 'I believe that with one 
exception, myself, your descriptions were right in every case. I 



am a Mohammedan as you say and I am travelling from Gaya 
to Muzaffarpur, though how you know this I cannot think for I 
have not shown my railway ticket to anyone since I purchased 
it at Gaya. But you were wrong in describing me as a hide 
merchant. I do not deal in hides. I deal in tobacco. 1 On 
occasions special trains were run for important personages, 
and in connexion with these trains a special ferry steamer was 
run, for the timings of which I was responsible. I met one 
afternoon one of these special trains, which was conveying the 
Prime Minister of Nepal, twenty ladies of his household, a 
Secretary, and a large retinue of servants from Katmandu, the 
capital of Nepal, to Calcutta. As the train came to a standstill a 
blond-headed giant in Nepalese national dress jumped down 
from the train and went to the carriage in which the Prime 
Minister was travelling. Here the man opened a big umbrella, 
put his back to the door of the carriage, lifted his right arm and 
placed his hand on his hip. Presently the door behind him 
opened and the Prime Minister appeared, carrying a gold¬ 
headed cane in his hand. With practiced ease the Prime 
"Minister took his seat on the man's arm and when he had 
made himself comfortable the man raised the umbrella over the 
Prime Minister's head and set off. He carried his burden as 
effortlessly as another would have carried a celluloid doll on his 
300-yard walk, over loose sand, to the steamer. When I 
remarked to the Secretary, with whom I was acquainted, that I 
had never seen a greater feat of strength, he informed me that 
the Prime Minister always used the blond giant in the way I 
had just seen him being used, when other means of transport 
were not available. I was told that the man was a Nepalese, but 
my guess was that he was a national of northern Europe who 
for reasons best known to himself, or to his masters, had 
accepted service in an independent state on the borders of 
India. 

While the Prime Minister was being conveyed to the steamer, 
four attendants produced a rectangular piece of black silk, 
some twelve feet long and eight feet wide, which they laid on 



the sand close to a carriage, which had all its windows closed. 
The rectangle was fitted with loops at the four corners, and 
when hooks at the ends of four eight-foot silver staves had been 
inserted into the loops, and the staves stood on end, the 
rectangle revealed itself as a box-like structure without a 
bottom. One end of this structure was now raised to the level of 
the door of the closed carriage, and out of the carriage and into 
the silk box stepped the twenty ladies of the Prime Minister's 
household. With the stave-bearers walking on the outside of the 
box and only the twinkling patent-leather-shod feet of the 
ladies showing, the procession set off for the steamer. On the 
lower deck of the steamer one end of the box was raised and 
the ladies, all of whom appeared to be between sixteen and 
eighteen years of age, ran lightly up the stairway on to the 
upper deck, where I was talking to the Prime Minister. On a 
previous occasion I had suggested leaving the upper deck when 
the ladies arrived and had been told there was no necessity for 
me to do so and that the silk box was only intended to prevent 
the common men from seeing the ladies of the household. It is 
not possible for me to describe in detail the dress of the ladies, 
and all I can say is that in their gaily coloured, tight-fitting 
bodices and wide-spreading trousers, in the making of each of 
which forty yards of fine silk had been used, they looked, as 
they flitted from side to side of the steamer in an effort to see 
all that was to be seen, like rare and gorgeous butterflies. At 
Mokameh Ghat the same procedure was adopted to convey the 
Prime Minister and his ladies from the steamer to their special 
train, and when the whole party, and their mountain of 
luggage, were on board, the train steamed off on its way to 
Calcutta. Ten days later the party returned and I saw them off 
at Samaria Ghat on their way to Katmandu. 

A few days later I was working on a report that had to go in 
that night when my friend the Secretary walked into my office. 
With his clothes dirty and creased, and looking as though they 
had been slept in for many nights, he presented a very different 
appearance from the spruce and well-dressed official I had last 



seen in company with the Prime Minister. He accepted the 
chair I offered him and said, without any preamble, that he was 
in great trouble. The following is the story he told me. 

'On the last day of our visit to Calcutta the Prime Minister took 
the ladies of his household to the shop of Hamilton and Co., the 
leading jewellers in the city, and told them to select the jewels 
they fancied. The jewels were paid for in silver rupees for, as 
you know, we always take sufficient cash with us from Nepal to 
pay all our expenses and for everything we purchase. The 
selection of the jewels, the counting of the cash, the packing of 
the jewels into the suit-case I had taken to the shop for the 
purpose, and the sealing of the case by the jeweller, all took 
more time than we had anticipated. The result was that we had 
to dash back to our hotel, collect our luggage and retinue, and 
hurry to the station where our special train was waiting for us. 

'We arrived back in Katmandu in the late evening, and the 
following morning the Prime Minister sent for me and asked for 
the suit-case containing the jewels. Every room in the palace 
was searched and everyone who had been on the trip to 
Calcutta was questioned, yet no trace of the suit-case was 
found, nor would anyone admit having seen it at any time. I 
remembered having taken it out of the motor-car that conveyed 
me from the shop to the hotel, but thereafter I could not 
remember having seen it at any stage of the journey. I am 
personally responsible for the case and its contents and if it is 
not recovered I may lose more than my job, for according to the 
laws of our land I have committed a great crime. 

'There is in Nepal a hermit who is credited with second sight, 
and on the advice of my friends I went to him. I found the 
hermit, an old man in tattered clothing, living in a cave on the 
side of a great mountain, and to him I told my troubles. He 
listened to me in silence, asked no questions, and told me to 
return next morning. The following morning I again visited him 
and he told me that as he lay asleep the previous night he had 
a vision. In the vision he had seen the suit-case, with its seals 



intact, in a corner of a room hidden under boxes and bags of 
many kinds. The room was not far from a big river, had only 
one door leading into it, and this door was facing the east. This 
is all the hermit could tell me, so', the Secretary concluded, 
with tears in his eyes and a catch in his throat, 'I obtained 
permission to leave Nepal for a week and I have come to see if 
you can help me, for it is possible that the Ganges is the river 
the hermit saw in his vision. 1 In the Himalayas no one doubts 
the ability of individuals alleged to be gifted with second sight 
to help in recovering property lost or mislaid. That the 
Secretary believed what the hermit had told him there was no 
question, and his anxiety now was to regain possession of the 
suit-case, containing jewellery valued at Rs. 150,000 (£10,000), 
before others found and rifled it. 

There were many rooms at Mokameh Ghat in which a 
miscellaneous assortment of goods was stored, but none of 
them answered to the description given by the hermit. I did, 
however, know of one room that answered to the description, 
and this room was the parcel office at Mokameh Junction, two 
miles from Mokameh Ghat. Having borrowed Kelly's trolly, I 
sent the Secretary to the Junction with Ram Saran. At the 
parcel office the clerk in charge denied all knowledge of the 
suit-case, but he raised no objection to the pile of luggage in 
the office being taken out on to the platform, and when this had 
been done, the suit- case was revealed with all its seals intact. 

The question then arose as to how the case came to be in the 
office without the clerk's knowledge. The station master now 
came on the scene and his inquiries elicited the fact that the 
suit-case had been put in the office by a carriage sweeper, the 
lowest-paid man on the staff. This man had been ordered to 
sweep out the train in which the Prime Minister had travelled 
from Calcutta to Mokameh Ghat, and tucked away under the 
seat in one of the carriages he had found the suitcase. When 
his task was finished he carried the suit-case a distance of a 
quarter of a mile to the platform, and there being no one on the 
platform at the time to whom he could hand over the case he 



had put it in a corner of the parcel office. He expressed regret, 
and asked for forgiveness if he had done anything wrong. 

Bachelors and their servants, as a rule, get into more or less 
set habits and my servants and I were no exception to the rule. 
Except when work was heavy I invariably returned to my house 
at 8 p.m. and when my house servant, waiting on the veranda, 
saw me coming he called to the waterman to lay my bath, for 
whether it was summer or winter I always had a hot bath. 

There were three rooms at the front of the house opening on to 
the veranda: a dining room, a sitting room, and a bedroom. 
Attached to the bedroom was a small bathroom, ten feet long 
and six wide. This bathroom had two doors and one small 
window. One of the doors opened on to the veranda, and the 
other led to the bedroom. The window was opposite the 
bedroom door, and set high up in the outer wall of the house. 
The furniture of the bathroom consisted of an egg-shaped 
wooden bath, long enough to sit in, a wooden bath-mat with 
holes in it, and two earthen vessels containing cold water. After 
the waterman had laid the bath my servant would bolt the 
outer door of the bathroom and on his way through the 
bedroom pick up the shoes I had discarded and take them to 
the kitchen to clean. There he would remain until I called for 
dinner. 

One night after my servant had gone to the kitchen I took a 
small hand-lamp off the dressing table, went into the bathroom 
and there placed it on a low wall, six inches high and nine 
inches wide, which ran half-way across- the width of the room. 
Then I turned and bolted the door, which like most doors in 
India sagged on its hinges and would not remain shut unless 
bolted. I had spent most of that day on the coal platform so did 
not spare the soap, and with a lather on my head and face that 
did credit to the manufacturers I opened my eyes to replace the 
soap on the bath-mat and, to my horror, saw the head of a 
snake projecting up over the end of the bath and within a few 
inches of my toes. My movements while soaping my head and 
splashing the water about had evidently annoyed the snake, a 



big cobra, for its hood was expanded and its long forked tongue 
was flicking in and out of its wicked-looking mouth. The right 
thing for me to have done would have been to keep my hands 
moving, draw my feet away from the snake, and moving very 
slowly stand up and step backwards to the door behind me, 
keeping my eyes on the snake all the time. But what I very 
foolishly did was to grab the sides of the bath and stand up and 
step backwards, all in one movement, on to the low wall. On 
this cemented wall my foot slipped, and while trying to regain 
my balance a stream of water ran off my elbow on to the wick 
of the lamp and extinguished it, plunging the room in pitch 
darkness. So here I was shut in a small dark room with one of 
the most deadly snakes in India. One step to the left or one step 
to the rear would have taken me to either of the two doors, but 
not knowing where the snake was I was frightened to move for 
fear of putting my bare foot on it. Moreover, both doors were 
bolted at the bottom, and even if I avoided stepping on the 
snake I should have to feel about for the bolts where the snake, 
in his efforts to get out of the room, was most likely to be. 

The servants' quarters were in a corner of the compound fifty 
yards away on the dining-room side of the house, so shouting to 
them would be of no avail, and my only hope of rescue was that 
my servant would get tired of waiting for me to call for dinner, 
or that a friend would come to see me, and I devoutly hoped 
this would happen before the cobra bit me. The fact that the 
cobra was as much trapped as I was in no way comforted me, 
for only a few days previously one of my men had had a similar 
experience. He had gone into his house in the early afternoon 
in order to put away the wages I had just paid him. While he 
was opening his box he heard a hiss behind him, and turning 
round saw a cobra advancing towards him from the direction of 
the open door. Backing against the wall behind him, for there 
was only one door to the room, the unfortunate man had tried 
to fend off the cobra with his hands, and while doing so was 
bitten twelve times on hands and on legs. Neighbours heard his 
cries and came to his rescue, but he died a few minutes later. I 



learnt that night that small things can be more nerve-racking 
and terrifying than big happenings. Every drop of water that 
trickled down my legs was converted in my imagination into 
the long forked tongue of the cobra licking my bare skin, a 
prelude to the burying of his fangs in my flesh. 

How long I remained in the room with the cobra I cannot say. 
My servant said later that it was only half an hour, and no 
sound has ever been more welcome to me than the sounds I 
heard as my servant laid the table for dinner. I called him to the 
bathroom door, told him of my predicament, and instructed him 
to fetch a lantern and a ladder. After another long wait I heard 
a babel of voices, followed by the scraping of the ladder against 
the outer wall of the house. When the lantern had been lifted to 
the window, ten feet above ground, it did not illuminate the 
room, so I told the man who was holding it to break a pane of 
glass and pass the lantern through the opening. The opening 
was too small for the lantern to be passed in upright. However, 
after it had been relit three times it was finally inserted into the 
room and, feeling that the cobra was behind me, I turned my 
head and saw it lying at the bottom of the bedroom door two 
feet away. Leaning forward very slowly, I picked up the heavy 
bath-mat, raised it high and let it fall as the cobra was sliding 
over the floor towards me. Fortunately I judged my aim 
accurately and the bath mat crashed down on the cobra's neck 
six inches from its head. As it bit at the wood and lashed about 
with its tail I took a hasty stride to the veranda door and in a 
moment was outside among a crowd of men, armed with sticks 
and carrying lanterns, for word had got round to the railway 
quarters that I was having a life-and-death struggle with a big 
snake in a locked room. The pinned-down snake was soon 
dispatched and it was not until the last of the men had gone, 
leaving their congratulations, that I realized I had no clothes on 
and that my eyes were full of soap. How the snake came to be 
in the bathroom I never knew. It may have entered by one of 
the doors, or it may have fallen from the roof, which was made 
of thatch and full of rats and squirrels, and tunnelled with 



sparrows' nests. Anyway; the servants who had laid my bath 
and I had much to be thankful for, for we approached that night 
very near the gate of the Happy Hunting Grounds. We at 
Mokameh Ghat observed no Hindu or Mohammedan holidays, 
for no matter what the day was work had to go on. There was, 
however, one day in the year that all of us looked forward to 
with anticipation and great pleasure, and that day was 
Christmas. On this day custom ordained that I should remain in 
my house until ten o'clock, and punctually at this hour Ram 
Saran— dressed in his best clothes and wearing an enormous 
pink silk turban, specially kept for the occasion— would 
present himself to conduct me to my office. Our funds did not 
run to bunting, but we had a large stock of red and green 
signal flags, and with these flags and strings of marigold and 
jasmine flowers. Ram Saran and his band of willing helpers, 
working from early morning, had given the office and its 
surroundings a gay and festive appearance. Near the office 
door a table and a chair were set, and on the table stood a 
metal pot containing a bunch of my best roses tied round with 
twine as tight as twine could be tied. Ranged in front of the 
table were the railway staff, my headmen, and all my labourers. 
And all were dressed in clean clothes, for no matter how dirty 
we were during the rest of the year, on Christmas Day we had 
to be clean. 

After I had taken my seat on the chair and Ram Saran had put 
a garland of jasmine round my neck, the proceedings started 
with a long speech by Ram Saran, followed by a short one by 
me. Sweets were then distributed to the children, and after this 
messy proceeding was over to the satisfaction of all concerned, 
the real business of the day started— the distribution of a cash 
bonus to Ram Saran, to the staff, and to the labourers. The 
rates I received for my handling contract were woefully small, 
but even so, by the willing co-operation of all concerned, I did 
make a profit, and eighty per cent, of this profit was distributed 
on Christmas Day. Small as this bonus was— in the good years 
it amounted to no more than a month's pay, or a month's 



earnings— it was greatly appreciated, and the goodwill and 
willing co-operation it ensured enabled me to handle a million 
tons of goods a year for twenty-one years without one single 
unpleasant incident, and without one single day's stoppage of 
work.