BOOK STX: 

TREE. TOPS 




Introduction 

by Lord Haileyi. Governor of the United Provinces, 1928- 
1934. 

JIM CORBETT'S story of the visit paid by Her Majesty the 
Queen to Tree Tops in 1952 was written only a short time 
before his sudden death in Kenya on 19 April 1955. He was 
then nearing his eightieth year. When he had visited England in 
1951 he had shown few signs of his age, but he had in fact 
never fully recovered from the effects of the severe illness from 
which he had suffered in Central India, in the course of training 
British troops in jungle fighting before they took part in the 
Burma Campaign. 

I do not know how far the picture formed of him by his readers 
differs from that which will live in the memory of his friends. In 
one respect perhaps the reader who has known him through 
his books may have some advantage over them. He seldom 
spoke of the hardships and dangers of those encounters with 
man-eaters which gave such an incomparable thrill to his 
record of them. He felt, I think, that these were matters which 
lay between him and the great beasts whose strength and 
courage he respected, and whose lapses into ways that were a 
menace to man he could in due season forget. 

Many of his acquaintances probably failed to realize that the 
name and deeds of this quiet and unassuming man were a 
household word among the hillfolk of the scattered hamlets of 
Kumaon. I doubt indeed if he would ever have given to the 
world the earliest of his books. Man-eaters of Kumaon, in 1944, 
had he not hoped that its publication might contribute 
something to the funds of St. Dunstan's, which had in the 
previous year opened a training school for blinded Indian 
soldiers. I remember how modest was his own estimate of what 
this contribution might be. He did not realize how enthralling 
were the stories he had to tell, nor how greatly their interest 
would be enhanced by his manner of telling them. Yet, as the 
world was soon to acknowledge, he possessed, in fact, that 



supreme art of narrative which owes nothing to conscious 
artistry. 

Since, however, he is necessarily the centre of his own stories, 
they have much to reveal of his own history and way of life. 
Those who have read My India and Jungle Lore will not need to 
be told that he was one of a large family and was brought up 
during the summer months at the Himalayan hill station of 
Naini Tal, and in the winter on the small property held by his 
family at Kaladhungi in the foothills below it. Sport was in his 
blood, and from boyhood he set himself to gain that intimacy 
with the jungle and its life that he would need if he was to 
enjoy such sport as his modest means allowed. He never forgot 
in after life the habit which he then taught himself of noiseless 
movement in the jungle nor his rare understanding of its sights 
and sounds, and it was then that he began to acquire that 
unique combination of speed and accuracy in the use of the 
rifle to which he was later to owe so much. One who knew him 
at that period has said, however, that even in his youth he took 
no special pride in this achievement. Good shooting was to him 
an obligation rather than an accomplishment. If things were to 
be killed, then this should be done instantly, and without pain 
to them. 

As soon as he left school at Naini Tal, he found employment 
with the Railway Department, at first in small posts but 
afterwards in charge of the transport at Mokameh Ghat, where 
the Ganges River created a broad gap between the two railway 
systems. There is a great bridge over the river now, but at that 
time more than half a million tons of traffic were ferried across 
it every year, and had to be transhipped from one gauge of rails 
to another. The conditions of work were exceptionally arduous, 
and that he carried it on for over twenty years was due not only 
to his power of physical endurance, but to his friendly personal 
contacts with the large force of Indian labour which he 
employed as contractor. They gave an unmistakable proof of 
their own feelings for him during the First World War. He 
helped to raise a Kumaon Labour Corps for service overseas. 



and took his section of it to France. It was then that his Indian 
subordinates at Mokameh Ghat arranged with the labourers 
that they would together carry on the work on his behalf 
throughout his absence. In the War he was given the 
substantive rank of Major in the Indian Army. 

The nature of the work during these years gave him little 
leisure for sport, but during his holidays in Kumaon he was 
able on three occasions to answer the calls which were made 
on him for his help against man-eaters. Between the years 
1907 and 1911 he disposed of the Champawat and Muktesar 
man-eaters and the Panar leopard. The first and last of these 
marauders were believed to have killed between them no fewer 
than 886 human beings, and they were perhaps the worst of 
the man-eaters from which Kumaon suffered in our generation, 
though others of a later date became more notorious. The 
leopard of Rudraprayag, for instance, which was officially 
recorded to have killed 150 human beings, acquired so wide a 
reputation in India because it preyed on the pilgrims who 
followed the route to a well-known Hindu shrine. 

With his retirement from his work at Mokameh Ghat there 
began a new chapter in his life. He was now his own master. 

His requirements were simple; he was unmarried, but he had 
at Naini Tal and Kaladhungi the devoted companionship of two 
sisters, one of whom (the Maggie to whom he so often refers) 
has survived him. It was now that there occurred the majority 
of the encounters with man-eaters of which he has written in 
his books. The passing of the years did nothing to diminish the 
energy or the courage which he devoted to this task. The 
disposal of the Rudraprayag leopard, with its long tale of hard 
living and of sleepless nights, when Corbett was almost as 
often the hunted as the hunter, took place when he was fifty- 
one. The killing of the Thak tiger occurred when he was sixty- 
three. There seemed to be no limit to his endurance of fatigue 
or his ability to meet unruffled what seemed to be misfortune 
or mishap. 



But there was another aspect also in the life which he now led. 
It seemed that sport, in the sense that the word is commonly 
used, had ceased to hold first place with him. So far as he was 
concerned, the tiger and the leopard at all events were 
immune, unless they were taking human life. Often when he 
and I were together, we were visited by deputations of the 
hillfolk asking for help; to be more correct, it was he that they 
sought out. He it was, as all their world knew, who had so often 
ventured his own life to save others in Kumaon from a Terror 
which filled their days and nights with fear. There was indeed 
here something that passed the ordinary bounds of human fear, 
for the ways of the ancient gods of the hills are unpredictable, 
and who could tell that the Terror was not a visitation from 
them? But the rubric that Corbett applied to the inquisition 
which was now opened was strict, however friendly and 
considerate in its terms. It was no use for them to plead their 
losses in cattle or goats. The tiger was lord of the jungle and 
must have its dues. Not until he himself was convinced that a 
tiger had been killing human beings, not by chance or in anger, 
but because it sought them as food, would he agree to come to 
their help. 

One noticed, too, that the keen observation of jungle life that 
had once seemed to minister to sport now became of increasing 
interest for its own sake. There could be nothing more 
enjoyable than to spend in his company long days on the 
hillside or in the jungle, where every twisted twig, every call of 
bird or animal, seemed to carry its own meaning to him; or, if 
the interpretation was not at once clear, would provide him 
with matter for most engaging speculation. For him, this was 
not nature study, it was his world, and these were the things 
that meant life and death to its inhabitants. Photography 
became of greater concern than shooting. I recall an occasion 
when I chanced on him as he emerged in some apparent 
disorder from a tangled thicket in the jungle near Kaladhungi. 
He explained that he had been trying to get a picture of a 
tigress, but she was in a bad temper, and as often as he went 



into the thicket she drove him out again. He added, however, as 
one who was ready to make due allowances, that she had her 
cubs with her. This seemed to be typical of the terms on winch 
he now stood with the animals of Kumaon. There was an 
understanding which would justify the tigress in demonstrating 
against the intrusion on her nursery. But the matter need not 
be carried further. 

When during the Second World War he gave the Government 
his services in training troops in jungle fighting, he received 
the honorary rank of Lieutenant-Colonel, and in 1946 there was 
conferred on him the distinction of the Companionship of the 
Indian Empire. The Government had previously allowed him a 
privilege which he valued very highly when it gave him the 
'freedom of the jungle', or, in other words, the liberty of entry 
to all its Forest Reserves. I do not need to speak here of the 
regard in which he came to be held by the people of Kumaon. 

As kindly and generous as he was fearless, he gave freely of 
himself, and asked nothing in return. But I think that in the 
olden days he would have been one of the small band of 
Europeans whose memory has been worshipped by Indians as 
that of men who were in some measure also gods. 

When so many of his friends left India in 1947, he and his sister 
decided to leave also, and made their home at Nyeri in Kenya. 

It could not have been an easy decision for him to make. He 
loved his home in Kaladhungi as greatly as he was himself 
beloved by its villagers. But Kenya could at all events minister 
to his passion for photographing wild life, and he was able to 
indulge it to the full. The proximity of Tree Tops to Nyeri made 
him a frequent visitor there, and it is pleasant to know that we 
have now his own story of the visit of Her Majesty the Queen to 
Tree Tops, for the letters which he wrote at the time to his 
friends showed how very deeply moved he was by his 
experiences as a member of her party. 

London HAILEY 
September 1955 



Tree Tops 

A BRILLIANT sun was shining in a deep blue sky and the air 
was crisp and invigorating, on that fifth day of February 1952. 

I was standing on a wooden platform, thirty feet above ground, 
and before me stretched an oval-shaped clearing in the forest, 
two hundred yards long and a hundred yards wide. A miniature 
lake with tall tufts of grass dotted on it occupied two-thirds of 
this open space, the rest consisted of a salt-lick. On the farther 
margin of the lake a snow-white heron stood motionless, 
waiting patiently for the approach of unwary frogs, and in the 
open water in front of it a pair of dabchicks were taking their 
young brood of four, which looked no bigger than marbles, on 
what was evidently their first ex-cursion into a danger-filled 
world. On the salt-lick a solitary rhino was moving restlessly, 
occasionally stooping to lick the salt ground and then throwing 
his head to snuff the wind that was blowing down towards him 
from the forest. 

The lake and the salt-lick were surrounded on three sides by 
dense tree forests and on the fourth, and farthest from me, by a 
hundred-yard-wide strip of grass which came right down to the 
margin of the lake. Beyond the strip of grass, and forming a 
frame for it, was a belt of Cape Chestnuts. These chestnuts 
were in full bloom, and sporting among the blue tinged with 
purple flowers was a troop of colobus monkeys winch, with 
their flowing white tails and long white mantles hanging from 
their shoulders, looked like giant butterflies as they flitted from 
tree to tree. A more beautiful and a more peaceful scene it 
would not have been possible to conceive; and yet not all was 
peace, for in the dense forest beyond the monkeys was a herd 
of elephants and in the herd was discord. Every few minutes 
the air was rent by loud trumpeting mingled with the 
screaming and deep rumbling of angry elephants. As the 
sounds of strife drew nearer, the monkeys collected in a group 
and after barking in alarm flitted away over the tree-tops, led 
by a mother who had a young babe clinging to her breast. The 



solitary rhino now decided his need of salt had been met and 
snorting his defiance he turned in one movement, as only a 
rhino can turn, and with head held high and tail in the air, 
trotted into the forest on the left. Only the heron, still patient 
and unrewarded, and the family of dabchicks, remained 
unaffected by the approaching herd. Presently out of the dense 
forest the elephants began to appear, not in Indian file but on a 
broad front of fifty yards. Silent now, and unhurried, in twos 
and threes they drifted on to the bush-dotted strip of grass, 
while my eyes ranged back and forth until I had counted forty- 
seven. The last to come into the open were three bulls, one 
quite evidently the master of the herd and the other two 
younger brothers, or possibly sons, who were approaching the 
time when they would wrest the mastery of the herd from their 
elder, and drive him into exile. 

At the far end of the platform on which I was standing a short 
flight of steps led up into the hut which is known to all the 
world as 'Tree Tops'. The hut is built in the upper branches of a 
giant ficus tree and is only accessible by a steep and narrow 
thirty-foot-long ladder. Time was when, for the safety of the 
occupants of the hut, the foot of the ladder was cranked by a 
winch into the upper branches of an adjoining tree, but this 
safety device had long since been discontinued. The 
accommodation of the hut consisted of a dining-room, in one 
corner of which was recessed a wood-burning stove, three 
bedrooms for visitors, a narrow slip of a room for the White 
Hunter, and a long open balcony provided with comfortable 
cushioned seats. From the balcony there was a clear and 
uninterrupted view of the miniature lake, the salt-lick, and of 
the forest beyond, with the Aberdare mountains in the 
background rising to a height of 14,000 feet. 

* * * 

PRINCESS ELIZABETH and the Duke of Edinburgh had arrived 
at the Royal Lodge, Sagana, twenty miles from Nyeri, two days 
before, and on that February morning I had just finished 



shaving when I received a breath-taking telephone message 
informing me that Her Royal Highness had been graciously 
pleased to invite me to accompany her to Tree Tops. The Royal 
Party were to leave the Lodge at 1 p.m. and, driving slowly 
arrive at 2 p.m. at Tree Tops where I was to meet them. 

Nyeri has one of the finest polo grounds in Kenya and the 
previous day a match in which the Duke had taken part had 
been played there, with the Princess watching. The polo 
ground is eight miles from Nyeri and fifteen miles from the 
Royal Lodge, and is surrounded on three sides by forest and 
high grass. Neither my sister Maggie nor I feel happy in a 
crowd, so while the populace from far and wide was collecting 
at the polo ground for the great event, we motored to a bridge 
spanning a deep ravine which runs through dense forest 
towards the ground. Though a state of emergency had not up 
to that time been declared, security measures were being 
taken, for the unrest had started and there had been in the 
neighbourhood a number of cases of arson about which the 
press, for obvious reasons, had kept silent. I was uneasy about 
the deep ravine which afforded an easy approach to the polo 
ground. However, on examining the stretches of sand in it I was 
relieved to find no footprints, so we spent the rest of the 
evening near the bridge, keeping watch on the ravine. This 
accounts for our absence from the polo match. 

* * * 

AFTER receiving the telephone message I shaved a second 
time, had breakfast, and then went to the administrative 
headquarters to get a road pass, for I had to use the road that 
had been closed for the Royal Party. At midday I motored eight 
miles along the main road and, leaving it at the polo ground, 
took a rough track which runs for two miles up a narrow valley 
to the foot of the Tree Tops hill. Here, where the track ends and 
a narrow footpath winds up the hill through dense cover for six 
hundred yards to Tree Tops, I removed my handbag and British 
warm from the car, and sent it back to Nyeri. To a number of 



trees adjoining the path, slats of wood had been nailed to form 
ladders as a means of escape in the event of attack by 
elephants, rhino, or buffaloes. It is a sobering fact that two 
days after that path had been traversed by the Princess and her 
party, four of the biggest trees to which ladders were nailed 
were uprooted by elephants. 

* * * 

IT was now 1.30 p.m. on that fifth day of February, and 2 p.m. 
was zero hour. The elephants, still silent and peaceful, were 
quietly browsing on the grass and bushes while slowly drifting 
down towards the lake, and it was possible to observe them 
more closely. They were of all sizes and of all ages, and five of 
the cows were accompanied by calves only a few weeks old. 
These five cows, and the three bulls, who were in that seasonal 
condition known as 'must 7 , were a potential danger. However, if 
the herd remained on the far side of the lake for another thirty 
minutes, all would be well. The minutes dragged by, as they do 
in times of strain, and when only fifteen remained the 
elephants started to edge down towards the salt-lick. This salt¬ 
lick extended to within a few yards of the ficus tree, and from 
the projecting balcony it was possible to drop a handkerchief 
on to any animal on the lick below. Between the lick and the 
tree a few small branches had been laid, to form a screen for 
people approaching the ladder leading to the hut above. These 
branches had been crushed down by elephants and other 
animals and, at the time I am writing of, the screen was a 
screen only in name. 

On the platform, with the passing of every moment, my anxiety 
was growing. The herd of forty-seven elephants was crowded 
together on the salt-lick. It was zero hour and the Royal Party, 
if it was up to time, would now be on the path, and at that 
moment the big bull elephant, annoyed by the attention the two 
young bulls were paying to one of the cows, charged them and 
all three enraged animals dashed into the forest on the left, 
trumpeting and screaming with rage, and started to circle 



round at the back of Tree Tops, and in the direction of the 
path. Would the escort with the Royal Party on hearing the 
elephants, decide that it was too dangerous to go forward and 
so return to the comparative safety of the open ground where 
they had alighted from their cars, or would they take the risk of 
trying to reach the ladder leading up to the hut? Crossing the 
platform, I peered into the forest. From the foot of the ladder 
the path ran for forty yards in a straight line, and then curved 
out of sight to the left. Terrifying sounds were to be heard in 
plenty but nothing was to be seen on the path, and there was 
nothing that could be done. Presently I caught sight of a man 
carrying a rifle at the ready, followed closely by a small trim 
figure. The party had arrived, and on reaching the bend in the 
path, from where the elephants on the salt-lick were in full 
view, came to a halt. No time was to be lost, so, slipping down 
the ladder, I approached the small figure which, from her 
photographs, I recognized as Princess Elizabeth. Smiling her 
greeting, and without a moment's hesitation, the Princess 
walked unhurriedly straight towards the elephants which were 
now crowded at the hut end of the salt-lick, and within ten 
yards of the foot of the ladder. Handing her handbag and 
camera to me, the Princess climbed the steep ladder, followed 
by Lady Pamela Mountbatten, the Duke, and Commander 
Parker. The escort, led by Edward Windley, then turned and 
retraced their steps down the footpath. 

In the course of a long lifetime I have seen some courageous 
acts, but few to compare with what I witnessed on that fifth day 
of February. The Princess and her companions, who had never 
previously been on foot in an African forest, had set out that 
glorious day to go peacefully to Tree Tops and, from the 
moment they left, their ears had been assailed— as they told 
me later— by the rampaging of angry elephants. In single file, 
and through dense bush where visibility in places was limited 
to a yard or two, they went towards those sounds, which grew 
more awe-inspiring the nearer they approached them. And 
then, when they came to the bend in the path and within sight 



of the elephants, they found that they would have to approach 
within ten yards of them to reach the safety of the ladder. A 
minute after climbing the ladder the Princess was sitting on the 
balcony and, with steady hands, was filming the elephants. 

It was not usual for elephants to be seen at Tree Tops at that 
time of the day and, while they were being filmed, they did all 
that elephants could be expected to do. The old bull returned to 
the herd, followed at a respectful distance by the two young 
bulls, and he again chased them away, to the accompaniment of 
loud trumpeting and angry screaming. A flock of doves alighted 
on an open patch of ground, and on seeing them one of the 
elephants filled its trunk with dust and, cautiously approaching, 
discharged the dust at them, for all the world like a man 
discharging a gun loaded with black powder. The doves were 
doing no harm and it was out of sheer mischief that the 
elephant frightened them away, for after doing so it flicked its 
trunk up and down as if laughing and flapped its ears with 
delight. The Duke witnessed this side-play with great 
amusement and when the doves returned and the same 
elephant, or it may have been another, again sucked dust into 
its trunk and approached the birds he drew the Princess's 
attention to the scene, which she filmed. A cow elephant now 
came towards us with the smallest of the calves close to her 
side. Stopping a few yards in front of the balcony the mother 
pressed the damp tip of her trunk on to the salt-impregnated 
dust, and then conveyed it to her mouth. The calf, taking 
advantage of its mother's preoccupation, inserted its head 
under her left foreleg and started to suckle. Greatly interested 
in this filial scene the Princess, who had her eye to her cine¬ 
camera, exclaimed, 'Oh, look. It is going to drive the baby 
away! 1 This was said as a small elephant, three or four years of 
age, trotted up to the mother and inserting its head under her 
right foreleg, also started to feed. The mother stood perfectly 
still while the meal was in progress and when the baby and its 
elder sister had had enough, or possibly when there was no 
more to be had, the mother disengaged herself and passing 



under the balcony; accompanied by the baby went out on to a 
spit of land jutting into the lake. Here she had a drink, sucking 
the water into her trunk, raising her head, and pouring it down 
her throat. After guenching her thirst she walked into the lake 
for a few yards and then stood still. Left to itself the baby got 
nervous and started to squeal in a thin small voice. To the cry 
for help the mother paid not the least attention, for this was a 
lesson that it was safe for the young to follow where the mother 
led. Eventually the baby summoned sufficient courage to wade 
into the water, and when it was within reach the mother 
tenderly drew it to her and, supporting it with her trunk, gently 
propelled it to the far bank. 

When watching a herd of elephants it is intensely interesting to 
see how kind they are to the young. Bored with standing about 
while their elders are feeding, the young play about and get in 
the way. When this happens, even with great terrifying-looking 
bulls, the young are gently put aside, and are never struck or 
trodden on. Of all the animals in the wild, elephants have the 
most real family or herd life. When a female retires for 
maternity reasons the elders of her own sex are always on hand 
to keep her company and to protect the young, and until the 
new arrival is able to walk the herd remains in the vicinity. If 
young or old get into difficulties or are threatened with danger, 
real or imaginary, the others rally round to give what help they 
can. It is for this reason that herds in which there are young 
are avoided, and it was for the same reason that the approach 
to the ladder was dangerous, for if the wind had changed, or if 
a nervous cow with a very young calf had seen the party, there 
would have been grave risk of an attack. Fortunately the wind 
did not change and by approaching the elephants unhurriedly 
and noiselessly the Princess and her companions avoided 
detection. 

Karra, a big male baboon who had recently lost a part of his 
upper lip in a fight, which gave him a very sinister look, now 
led his family of eleven down a forest track to the edge of the 
salt-lick. Here they halted, for elephants dislike baboons and I 



have seen them chase such a family into trees and then shake 
the trees in an attempt to dislodge them. Karra was taking no 
risks on this occasion. After surveying the scene he led his 
family back into the forest and, circling round the salt-lick, 
approached the ficus tree from the left. A bold young female 
now left the family and, climbing one of the wooden supports of 
the hut, arrived on the balcony. Running along the railing, and 
avoiding dislodging the cameras and field-glasses placed on it, 
she gained a branch of the ficus tree jutting out from the hut. 
Here she was rewarded with a sweet potato nearly as big as 
her head and while she sat contentedly peeling it with her 
teeth was filmed and photographed at a range of a few feet. 

* * * 

TIME slipped by unnoticed, and when the Princess was told 
that tea was ready in the dining- room, she said, 'Oh, please 
may I have it here? I don't want to miss one moment of this/ 
While tea was being taken, the elephants drifted off the salt¬ 
lick, some going into the forest on the left, and others passing 
under the balcony and going along the shore of the lake to the 
right. The Princess had laid her tea-cup aside and was looking 
at a sheaf of photographs, when I saw two male waterbuck 
racing at full speed down a forest glade towards the salt-lick. 

On my drawing the Princess's attention to the two animals, she 
reached for her camera, and the photographs slipped from her 
lap to the floor. Saying a word or two, amply justified in the 
circumstances, the Princess got her camera to her eye just as 
the two bucks, with only a length between them, dashed with a 
great splash into the lake. When the leading one had covered 
about forty yards it stumbled over a sunken tree-stump, and 
without a moment's hesitation the one behind plunged its horns 
into it. One horn entered the unfortunate animal's left buttock, 
while the other went between its legs and into its Stomach. So 
firmly fixed were the horns that their owner was dragged 
forward for a short distance before it could free itself. The 
wounded animal plunged on until it reached the shelter of a big 
tuft of grass. Here where the water was up to its neck it halted. 



while the aggressor circled round through shallow water and 
after shaking its head in defiance walked off into the forest. 
This incident, which was evidently the final act in a battle that 
had started in the forest, had been filmed by the Princess and 
now, laying her camera aside, she picked up her field-glasses. 
Presently passing the glasses to me, she asked, 'Is that blood? 
Do you think it will die?' Yes, it was blood. The water all round 
was red with it and, judging by the laboured way in which the 
stricken animal was breathing, I said I thought it would die. 

Karra and his family, who had been joined at the salt-lick by 
five warthogs and a dainty young doe bushbuck, were now 
causing a diversion. Two teenage females were competing for 
the affections of a boy friend, whom both of them claimed, and 
this was causing angry scenes and a lot of screaming. Karra 
would have settled the dispute by chastising all three of the 
young ones if he had not at the time been contentedly lying in 
the sun— being filmed— while one of his wives ran her fingers 
through his thick fur, looking for the things that were irritating 
his skin and which it was her wifely duty to find and remove. 
While this was going on, the five warthogs were down on their 
knees cropping the short grass on the edge of the salt-lick, and 
the youngest of Karra's children was industriously trying to 
climb up the young doe's hind-legs in order to catch its tail. 
Every time an attempt was made the doe skipped aside, 
enjoying the game as much as the onlookers. 

Neither the Princess nor the Duke smokes, so, as I am addicted 
to this pernicious habit, I left my seat near the Princess and 
went to the end of the balcony, where I was presently joined by 
the Duke. In the course of our conversation I told him that I 
knew Eric Shipton, that I had read the articles in The 
Times relating to the Abominable Snowman, and that I had 
seen the photographs taken by Shipton of the footprints in the 
snow. Asked if I had any theories about the Abominable 
Snowman, I told the Duke, much to his amusement, that I did 
not believe that the tracks in the snow photographed by 
Shipton had been made by a four-legged creature, and that 



while I would not dream of accusing Shipton of a leg-pull, I had 
a suspicion that his own leg had been pulled. I went on to say 
that knowing the great interest that was being taken in the 
snowman I was disappointed that Shipton had not followed the 
tracks back to see where they had come from, and forward to 
see where they led to. This, the Duke said, was a guestion he 
himself had put to Shipton, and that Shipton had told him the 
tracks had come from the direction of windswept rocks which 
had no snow on them, and that they led to other rocks devoid of 
snow where it was not possible to follow them. 

* * * 

WITH the passage of time, the shadows were beginning to 
lengthen. More animals, more in fact than had ever before 
been seen at Tree Tops, were coining out of the forest on to the 
open ground. In the slanting rays of the sun these animals, 
together with the massed bloom of the Cape Chestnuts, 
reflected in the still waters of the lake, presented a picture of 
peace and of beauty which only an inspired artist could have 
painted, and to which no words of mine could do justice. 

On rejoining the Princess she again handed me her field- 
glasses, and said, 'I think the poor thing is dead.' The stricken 
waterbuck did indeed look dead, but presently it raised its head 
from the tuft of grass on which it was resting and, struggling to 
the bank, lay with its neck stretched out and its chin resting on 
the ground. After it had been lying without movement in this 
position for a few minutes, three elephants went up and, 
stretching out their trunks, smelt it from head to tail. Not liking 
what they smelt they shook their heads in disapproval and 
quietly walked away. From the fact that the buck had not 
reacted in any way to the presence of the elephants we 
concluded that it was now dead, so Commander Parker and I 
went to look at it. While we were going through the hut and 
climbing down the ladder, the dead animal was dragged away— 
possibly by the two leopards whose pug marks I had seen on 
the path when going to Tree Tops— for all we found on 



reaching the spot was a pool of blood. Close to the pool of 
blood was a big bush behind which the partly eaten remains of 
the waterbuck were found next day 

Throughout the afternoon and evening the Princess made 
detailed notes of all the events she had witnessed, and of all 
the animals she filmed. These notes I knew were intended as a 
running commentary for those at home who would see her 
films while she was on her visit to Australia— the visit that did 
not take place. 

As the beautiful sunset faded out of the sky and the soft light of 
the moon illuminated the scene, cameras were put away and 
we talked in hushed voices suiting our surroundings and the 
subjects we talked on. I told the Princess how grieved I had 
been to hear of her father's illness, and how greatly I rejoiced 
that he was again well enough to indulge in his favourite sport, 
bird-shooting. And I told her how distressed I had been to learn 
from the B.B.C.'s broadcast that her father had stood hatless in 
a bitter cold wind to wave to her as she left the London airport. 
On my expressing the hope that he had not caught cold, she 
said that he was like that; he never thought of himself. The 
Princess then told me of her father's long illness, their 
anxieties, their fears, their hopes, and their joy when one day 
he put his walking-stick to his shoulder and said, T believe I 
could shoot now.' This was hailed as a turning-point in his 
illness, and a token that he had taken a new grip on life. The 
Princess asked me if I had ever shot grouse, and when I told 
her I had tried to do so, with little success, she said that I 
would know how difficult they are to shoot and would therefore 
have some idea of how well the King shot when she told me 
that on the first day he went out he shot, from one butt alone, 
forty-three birds. That was more, I told her, than I had shot in a 
week from many butts. The Princess rejoined that her father 
was a very good shot. She then told me where her father had 
been shooting on that fifth day of February, and where he 
intended shooting on the following-day. 



I have heard it said, and have seen it stated, that when the 
Princess waved goodbye to His Majesty the King at the London 
airport on her departure for Australia, she knew she would 
never see him again on earth. This I do not believe. I am 
convinced that the young Princess who spoke of her father that 
night with such great affection and pride, and who expressed 
the fervent hope that she would find him quite recovered on 
her return, never had the least suspicion that she would not 
see him again. 

* * * 

DINNER was now announced and, leaving the balcony, we filed 
into the dining-room. Covers had been laid for the seven people 
present, and as I moved to the farther end of the room, the 
Princess said, 'Won't you come and sit between us?' As she said 
this, the Duke indicated the cushioned seat that had been 
prepared for him and took the uncushioned seat next to it. On 
either side of the long unpolished dining-table were benches 
made, I am sure, of the hardest wood the Duke has ever sat on. 
Eric and Lady Bettie Walker were our hosts and the sumptuous 
repast they provided was greatly appreciated, for the 
excitements of the day and the fresh clean air of the forest had 
given everyone a keen appetite. While coffee was being made 
on the table, the spirit lamp caught fire, and was swept off the 
table on to the grass-matted floor. As frantic efforts were being 
made to stamp out the blaze the African boy who had served 
dinner unhurriedly came forward, ex-tinguished the flames 
with a wet cloth, retired to his cubbyhole behind the stove, and 
a minute later replaced the lamp refilled and relit on the table. 
Not long after. Tree Tops was raided and that very efficient boy 
was carried off, together with all the bedding, provisions, 
cooking utensils, and other movable articles in the hut, and it is 
left to conjecture whether the boy's bones are bleaching in the 
African sun, or whether he became a terrorist. 

After dinner the Princess and her party returned to the balcony. 
In the dim light of the moon nine rhino could be seen on the 



salt-lick. The heron and the family of dabchicks, the elephants, 
and the other animals, had all retired and the frogs that had 
been so vocal earlier were now silent. 

Leaving the Royal Party on the balcony, where they stayed until 
the moon set, and taking my old British warm which had served 
me well during the war years, I went down and made myself 
comfortable on the top step of the thirty-foot ladder. I had 
spent so many long nights on the branches of trees that a few 
hours on the step of a ladder was no hardship; in fact it was on 
this occasion a pleasure. A pleasure to feel that I would have 
the honour of guarding for one night the life of a very gracious 
lady who, in God's good time, would sit on the throne of 
England. And after that day of days I needed to be left in 
quietness with my thoughts. 

The moon set and in the heart of the forest the night was 
intensely dark. Visibility was nil but that did not matter, for 
with the exception of a snake nothing could climb the ladder 
without my feeling the vibration. Within a few inches of my 
face, and visible against the sky through a break in the foliage 
of the ficus tree, was hanging a manila rope which went over a 
pulley and was used for hauling up baggage and provisions 
from the ground to the rooms above. Presently, and without my 
having heard a sound, this rope was agitated. Something 
moving on soft feet had laid a hand on it, or had brushed 
against it. A few tense moments passed, but there was no 
vibration on the ladder, and then the rope was agitated again 
for the second time. Possibly one of the leopards whose pug 
marks I had seen on the path had come to the ladder and on 
finding it occupied had gone away. The ladder, though steep, 
would have offered no obstacle to an animal with the climbing 
ability of a leopard, and for all I knew to the contrary the 
platform above me may have been used by leopards as an 
observation post, or as a place on which to sleep at night. In 
contrast with an Indian jungle the African forest is 
disappointingly silent at night and, except for an occasional 
quarrel among the rhinos, all I heard throughout the night was 



the mournful call of a hyena, the bark of a bushbuck, and the 
cry of a tree hyrax. 

At the first glimmer of dawn I washed and shaved, and on 
going up to the hut found the Princess sitting on the balcony 
with a meter in her hand, testing the light before making a film 
record of an old rhino that was on the salt-lick. Daylight comes 
rapidly in Africa, and when the first rays of the sun lit up the 
scene before her, the Princess started to take the picture she 
had been waiting for. While she was filming the rhino the Duke 
drew her attention to a second rhino that was coming down to 
the salt-lick. The two animals were evidently old enemies, for 
they ran at each other in a very aggressive manner and for a 
time it appeared that a great fight would be staged for the 
benefit of the Royal onlookers. 

Advancing and retreating like experienced boxers manoeuvring 
for position, the two rhinos sparred round each other until the 
newcomer decided that discretion was preferable to valour 
and, with a final snort of defiance, trotted back into the forest, 
giving the Princess an opportunity of drinking the welcome hot 
tea that Lady Bettie was handing round. 

Though she had spent so few hours in sleep the Princess had 
started that second day with eyes sparkling and a face as fresh 
as a flower. No artificial aids were needed or used to enhance 
the bloom on her cheeks. Many years previously I had stood 
one winter's day on the banks of the Ganges with the Princess's 
grandfather, and looking at her now it was easy to see from 
whom she had inherited her beautiful colouring. 

With the rhinos gone and only the white heron standing 
motionless on the margin of the lake and the family of 
dabchicks cutting furrows across its smooth surface, cameras 
and field-glasses were put away and we went to the dining¬ 
room for breakfast, which consisted of scrambled eggs and 
bacon, toast, marmalade, and coffee made this time without 
mishap, and the choicest and most luscious fruit that Africa 
could provide. There was no need now to talk in hushed voices. 



and as we finished breakfast I remarked that the Princess was 
the only member of her family who had ever slept in a tree, or 
eaten a dinner and a breakfast prepared in one. 

The escort that was to conduct the Royal Party through the 
forest to the waiting cars now arrived, led by Edward Windley, 
and as the radiantly happy Princess drove away she waved her 
hand and called out, 'I will come again. 1 Soon after her return 
to the Royal Lodge the Princess was told that her father, of 
whom she had spoken with such affection and pride, had died 
in his sleep during the previous night. 

I do not think that any two young people have ever spent such 
happy and carefree hours as Princess Elizabeth and Duke 
Philip spent at Tree Tops, from 2 p.m. on 5 February to 10 a.m. 
on 6 February. For myself, those hours that I was honoured and 
privileged to spend in their company will remain with me while 
memory lasts. 

A register is kept of visitors to Tree Tops, and of the animals 
seen. The day after the Princess visited Tree Tops the register 
was brought to me to write up. After recording the names of 
the Royal Party, the animals seen, and the incidents connected 
with them, I wrote: 

For the first time in the history of the world a young girl 
climbed into a tree one day a Princess, and after having what 
she described as her most thrilling experience she climbed 
down from the tree the next day a Queen— God bless her. 

* * * 

ALL that now remains of the ficus tree and the hut honoured by 
Princess Elizabeth and the Duke of Edinburgh, and visited for a 
quarter of a century by thousands of people from all parts of 
the world, is a dead and blackened stump standing in a bed of 
ashes. From those ashes a new Tree Tops will one day arise, 
and from another balcony a new generation will view other 
birds and animals. But for those of us who knew the grand old 
tree and the friendly hut. Tree Tops has gone for ever. 



NYERI 
6 April 1955 
-END- 
