The Temple Tiger 1 

IT IS NOT POSSIBLE FOR those who have never lived in the 
upper reaches of the Himalayas to have any conception of the 
stranglehold that superstition has on the people who inhabit 
that sparsely populated region. The dividing line between the 
superstitions of simple uneducated people who live on high 
mountains, and the beliefs of sophisticated educated people 
who live at lesser heights, is so faint that it is difficult to 
determine where the one ends and the other begins. If 
therefore you are tempted to laugh at the credulity of the 
actors in the tale I am going to tell, I would ask you to pause 
for a moment and try to define the difference between 
superstition as exemplified in my tale, and your beliefs in the 
faith you have been brought up in. 

Shortly after the Kaiser's war, Robert Bellairs and I were on a 
shooting trip in the interiors of Kumaon and we camped one 
September evening at the foot of Trisul, where we were 
informed that 800 goats were sacrificed each year to the 
demon of Trisul. With us we had fifteen of the keenest and the 
most cheerful hillmen I have ever been associated with on 
a shikar. One of these men, Bala Singh, a Garhwali, had been 
with me for years and had accompanied me on many 
expeditions. It was his pride and pleasure when on shikar to 
select and carry the heaviest of my loads and, striding at the 
head of the other men, enliven the march with snatches of 
song. Around the camp-lire at night the men always sang part- 
songs before going to sleep, and during that first night, at the 
foot of Trisul, the singing lasted longer than usual and was 
accompanied by clapping of hands, shouting, and the beating of 
tin cans. 

It had been our intention to camp at this spot and explore the 
country around for baral and thar, and we were very surprised 
as we sat down to breakfast next morning to see our men 
making preparations to strike camp. On asking for an 



explanation we were told that the site we had camped on was 
not suitable: that it was damp; that the drinking water was bad; 
that fuel was difficult to get; and, finally that there was a better 
site two miles away. 

I had six Garhwalis to carry my luggage and I noticed that it 
was being made up into five head-loads, and that Bala Singh 
was sitting apart near the camp-fire with a blanket over his 
head and shoulders. After breakfast I walked over to him, and 
noted as I did so that all the other men had stopped work and 
were watching me very intently. Bala Singh saw me coming and 
made no attempt to greet me, which was very unusual, and to 
all my questions he returned the one answer— that he was not 
ill. That day we did our two-mile march in silence, Bala Singh 
bringing up the rear and moving like a man who was walking in 
his sleep, or who was under the influence of drugs. 

It was now quite apparent that whatever had happened to Bala 
Singh was affecting the other fourteen men, for they were 
performing their duties without their usual cheerfulness, and 
all of them had a strained, and frightened look on their faces. 
While the 40-lb tent Robert and I shared was being erected, I 
took my Garhwali servant Mothi Singh— who had been with me 
for twenty-five years— aside and demanded to be told what was 
wrong with Bala Singh. After a lot of hedging and evasive 
answers I eventually got Mothi Singh's story, which, when it 
came, was short and direct. 'While we were sitting round the 
camp-fire last night and singing,' Mothi Singh said, the 'demon 
of Trisul entered Bala Singh's mouth and he swallowed him'. 
Mothi Singh went on to say that they had shouted and beaten 
tin cans to try to drive the demon out of Bala Singh, but that 
they had not succeeded in doing so, and that now nothing could 
be done about it. 

Bala Singh was sitting apart, with the blanket still draped over 
his head. He was out of earshot of the other men, so, going 
over to him, I asked him to tell me what had happened the 
previous night. For a long minute Bala Singh looked up at me 



with eyes full of distress, and then in a hopeless tone of voice 
he said: 'Of what use is it. Sahib, for me to tell you what 
happened last night, for you will not believe me. 1 'Have I ever, 1 I 
asked, 'disbelieved you?' 'No,' he said, 'no, you have never 
disbelieved me, but this is a matter that you will not 
understand.' 'Whether I understand it or not, 1 I said, 'I want you 
to tell me exactly what happened.' After a long silence Bala 
Singh said: 'Very well. Sahib, I will tell you what happened. You 
know that in our hill-songs it is customary for one man to sing 
the verse, and for all the other men present to join in the 
chorus. Well, while I was singing a verse of one of our songs 
last night the demon of Trisul jumped into my mouth, and 
though I tried to eject him, he slipped down my throat into my 
stomach. The other men saw my struggle with the demon, for 
the fire was burning brightly, and. they tried to drive him away 
by shouting and beating tin cans; but,' he added with a sob, 

'the demon would not go.' 'Where is the demon now?' I asked. 
Placing his hand on the pit of his stomach, Bala Singh 
answered with great conviction, 'He is here. Sahib, here; I can 
feel him moving about. 1 

Robert had spent the day prospecting the ground to the west of 
our camp and had shot a thar, of which he had seen several. 
After dinner we sat long into the night reviewing the situation. 
We had planned for, and looked forward to, this shoot for many 
months. It had taken Robert seven days' and me ten days' hard 
walking to reach our shooting ground, and on the night of our 
arrival Bala Singh had swallowed the demon of Trisul. What 
our personal opinions were on this subject did not matter, but 
what did matter was that every man in camp was convinced 
that Bala Singh had a demon in his stomach, and they were 
frightened of him and were shunning his company. To carry on 
a month's shoot under these conditions was not possible, and 
Robert very reluctantly agreed with me that the only thing to 
be done was for me to return to Naini Tal with Bala Singh, 
while he carried on with the shoot alone. So next morning I 
packed up my things, and after an early breakfast with Robert, 



set off on my ten-day walk back to Naini Tal. 

Bala Singh, a perfect specimen of a man of about thirty years of 
age, had left Naini Tal full of the joy of life; now he returned 
silent, with a strained look in his eyes, and with the appearance 
of one who had lost all interest in life. My sisters, one of whom 
had been a medical missionary, did all they could for him. 
Friends from far and near came to visit him, but he just sat at 
the door of his house, never speaking unless spoken to. The 
civil surgeon of Naini Tal, Colonel Cooke, a man of great 
experience and a close friend of the family; came to visit Bala 
Singh at my request. His verdict after a long and painstaking 
examination was that Bala Singh was in perfect physical 
condition, and that he could ascribe no reason for the man's 
apparent depression. 

A few days later I had a brainwave. There was in Naini Tal at 
that time a very eminent Indian doctor and I thought if I could 
get him to examine Bala Singh and, after he had done so, tell 
him about the demon and persuade him to assure Bala Singh 
that there was no demon in his stomach, he would be able to 
cure him of his trouble, for in addition to being a Hindu, the 
doctor was himself a hillman. My brainwave, however, did not 
work out as I had hoped and anticipated, for as soon as he saw 
the sick man the doctor appeared to get suspicious and when in 
reply to some shrewd questions he learnt from Bala Singh that 
the demon of Trisul was in his stomach, he stepped away from 
him hurriedly and turning to me said, 'I am sorry you sent for 
me, for I can do nothing for this man.' 

There were two men from Bala Singh's village in Naini Tal. 

Next day I sent for them. They knew what was wrong with Bala 
Singh for they had come to see him several times, and at my 
request they agreed to take him home. Provided with funds the 
three men started on their eight-day journey next morning. 
Three weeks later the two men returned and made their report 
to me. 


Bala Singh had accomplished the journey without any trouble. 



On the night of his arrival home, and while his relatives and 
friends were gathered around him, he had suddenly announced 
to the assembly that the demon wanted to be released to return 
to Trisul, and that the only way this could be accomplished was 
for him to die. 'So,' my informants concluded, 'Bala Singh just 
lay down and died, and next morning we assisted at his 
cremation. 1 

Superstition, I am convinced, is a mental complaint similar to 
measles in that it attacks an individual or a community while 
leaving others immune. I therefore do not claim any credit for 
not contracting, while living on the upper reaches of the 
Himalayas, the virulent type of superstition that Bala Singh 
died of. But though I claim I am not superstitious, I can give no 
explanation for the experience I met with at the bungalow 
while hunting the Champawat tiger and the scream I heard 
coming from the deserted Thak village. Nor can I give any 
explanation for my repeated failures while engaged in one of 
the most interesting tiger hunts I have ever indulged in, which 

1 shall now relate. 

2 

No one who has visited Dabidhura is ever likely to forget the 
view that is to be obtained from the Rest House built near the 
summit of 'God's Mountain' by one who, quite evidently, was a 
lover of scenery From the veranda of the little three-roomed 
house, the hill falls steeply away to the valley of the Panar river. 
Beyond this valley, the hills rise ridge upon ridge until they 
merge into the eternal snows which, until the advent of 
aircraft, formed an impenetrable barrier between India and her 
hungry northern neighbours. 

A bridle-road running from Naini Hal, the administrative 
headquarters of Kumaon, to Loharghat, an outlying subdivision 
on her eastern border, passes through Dabidhura, and a branch 
of this road connects Dabidhura with Almora. I was hunting the 
Panar man-eating leopard— about which I shall tell you later- 
in the vicinity of this latter road when I was informed by a road 


overseer, on his way to Almora, that the leopard had killed a 
man at Dabidhura. So to Dabidhura I went. 

The western approach to Dabidhura is up one of the steepest 
roads in Kumaon. The object the man who designed this road 
had in view was to get to the top by the shortest route possible, 
and this he accomplished by dispensing with hairpin bends and 
running his road straight up the face of the eight-thousand-foot 
mountain. After panting up this road on a hot afternoon in 
April, I was sitting on the veranda of the Rest House drinking 
gallons of tea and feasting my eyes on the breathtaking view, 
when the priest of Dabidhura came to see me. When two years 
previously I had been hunting the Champawat man-eater, I had 
made friends with this frail old man, who officiated at the little 
temple nestling in the shadow of the great rock that had made 
Dabidhura a place of pilgrimage, and for whose presence in 
that unusual place I shall hazard no guess. When passing the 
temple a few minutes earlier I had made the customary 
offering which had been acknowledged by a nod by the old 
priest who was at his devotions. These devotions finished, the 
priest crossed the road that runs between the temple and the 
Rest House and accepting a cigarette sat down on the floor of 
the veranda with his back against the wall for a comfortable 
chat. He was a friendly old man with plenty of time on his 
hands, and as I had done all the walking I wanted to that day, 
we sat long into the evening chatting and smoking. 

From the priest I learnt that I had been misinformed by the 
road overseer about the man alleged to have been killed at 
Dabidhura the previous night by the man-eater. The alleged 
victim, a herdsman on his way from Almora to a village south of 
Dabidhura, had been the priest's guest the previous night. 

After the evening meal the herdsman had elected, against the 
priest's advice, to sleep on the chabutra (platform) of the 
temple. Round about midnight, when the rock was casting a 
shadow over the temple, the man-eater crept up and, seizing 
the man's ankles, attempted to drag him off the platform. 
Awakening with a yell, the man grabbed a smouldering bit of 



wood from the nearby fire, and beat oft the leopard. His yell 
brought the priest and several other men to his rescue and the 
combined force drove the animal away The man's wounds were 
not serious, and after they had received rough-and-ready 
treatment at the hands of the bania, whose shop was near the 
temple the herdsman continued his journey 

On the evidence of the priest I decided to remain at Dabidhura. 
The temple and the bania's shop were daily visited by men 
from the surrounding villages. These men would spread the 
news of my arrival and— knowing where I was to be found— I 
would immediately be informed of any kills of human beings, or 
of animals, that might take place in the area. 

As the old priest got up to leave me that evening I asked him if 
it would be possible for me to get some shooting in the locality, 
for my men had been without meat for many days and there 
was none to be purchased at Dabidhura. 'Yes, 1 he answered, 
'there is the temple tiger.' On my assuring him that I had no 
desire to shoot his tiger he rejoined with a laugh, 'I have no 
objection. Sahib, to your trying to shoot this tiger, but neither 
you nor anyone else will ever succeed in killing it.' And that is 
how I came to hear of the Dabidhura temple tiger, which 
provided me with one of the most 
interesting shikar experiences I have ever had. 

The morning following my arrival at Dabidhura I went down the 
Loharghat road to see if I could find any trace of the man-eater, 
or learn anything about it in the village adjoining the road, for 
the leopard was alleged to have gone in that direction after its 
attack on the man at the temple. On my return to the Rest 
House for a late lunch I found a man in conversation with my 
servant. This man informed me he had learnt from the priest 
that I wanted to do some shooting and he said he could show 
me a jarao— the hillman's name for sambhar— with horns as 
big as the branches of an oak tree. Hill sambhar do on 
occasions grow very fine horns— one had been shot in Kumaon 


some time previously with horns measuring forty-seven inches 
— and as a big animal would not only provide my men with 
meat but would also provide a meat ration for all at Dabidhura, 

I told the man I would accompany him after lunch. 

Some months previously I had been to Calcutta on a short visit, 
and one morning walked into Manton's, the gunmaker's shop. 
On a glass showcase near the door was a rifle. I was looking at 
the weapon when the manager, who was an old friend of mine, 
came up. He informed me that the rifle, a -275 by Westley 
Richards, was a new model which the makers were anxious to 
introduce on the Indian market for hill shooting. The rifle was a 
beauty and the manager had little difficulty in persuading me 
to buy it on the understanding that if it did not suit me I would 
be at liberty to return it. So when I set out with my village 
friend that evening to shoot his jarao with horns as big as the 
branches of an oak tree, I was carrying my brand-new rifle. 

To the south of Dabidhura the hill is less steep than it is to the 
north and we had proceeded in this direction through oak and 
scrub jungle for about two miles when we came to a grassy 
knoll with an extensive view of the valley below. Pointing to a 
small patch of grass— surrounded by dense jungle— on the 
left-hand side of the valley, my guide informed me that 
the jarao came out to graze on this patch of grass morning and 
evening. He further informed me that there was a footpath on 
the right-hand side of the valley which he used when on his 
way to or from Dabidhura, and that it was from this path he 
was accustomed to seeing the jarao. The rifle I was carrying 
was sighted to five hundred yards and guaranteed to be dead 
accurate, and as the distance between the path and 
the jama's feeding ground appeared to be only about three 
hundred yards, I decided to go down the path and wait for a 
shot. 

While we had been talking I had noticed some vultures circling 
to our left front. On drawing my companion's attention to them 
he informed me there was a small village in a fold of the hill in 



that direction and suggested that the vultures were possibly 
interested in some domestic animal that had died in the village. 
However, he said we would soon know what had attracted the 
birds, for our way lay through the village. The 'village' 
consisted of a single grass hut, a cattle shed, and an acre or so 
of terraced fields from which the crops had recently been cut. 

In one of these fields, separated from the hut and cattle shed 
by a ten-foot wide rainwater channel, vultures were tearing the 
last shreds of flesh from the skeleton of some large animal. A 
man walked out of the hut as we approached and, after 
greeting us, asked where I had come from and when I had 
arrived. On my telling him that I had come from Naini Tal to try 
to shoot the man-eating leopard and that I had arrived at 
Dabidhura the previous day, he expressed great regret at not 
having known of my arrival. 'For you could then,' he said, 'have 
shot the tiger that killed my cow.' He went on to tell me that he 
had tethered his fifteen head of cattle in the field, on which the 
vultures were pulling about the skeleton, the previous night, to 
fertilize it, and that during the night a tiger had come and 
killed one of the cows. He had no firearms and as there was no 
one within reach to whom he could appeal to shoot the tiger, he 
had gone to a village where a man lived who had the contract 
for collecting hides and skins in that area. This man had 
removed the hide of the cow two hours before my arrival, and 
the vultures had then carried out their function. When I asked 
the man whether he had known that there was a tiger in the 
locality and, if so, why he had tethered his cattle out in the 
open at night, he surprised me by saying there had always been 
a tiger on the Dabidhura hill, but that up to the previous night 
it had never molested cattle. 

As I moved away from the hut the man asked me where I was 
going and when I told him I was going to try to shoot 
the jarao on the far side of the valley, he begged me to leave 
the jarao alone for the present and to shoot the tiger. 'My 
holding is small and the land poor, as you can see,' he said, 'and 
if the tiger kills my cows, on which I depend for a living, my 



family and I will starve. 1 

While we had been talking, a woman had come up the hill with 
a gharra of water on her head, followed a little later by a girl 
carrying a bundle of green grass and a boy carrying a bundle of 
dry sticks: four people living on an acre or so of poor land and 
a few pints of milk— for hill cattle give little milk— sold to 
the bania at Dabidhura. Little wonder, then, that the man was 
so anxious for me to shoot the tiger. 

The vultures had destroyed the kill. This did not matter, 
however, for there was no heavy cover near the field where the 
tiger could have lain up and seen the vultures at their work, so 
he would be almost certain to return, for he had not been 
disturbed at his feed the previous night. My guide was also 
keen on my trying to shoot the tiger in preference to 
his jarao, so, telling the two men to sit down, I set off to try to 
find out in which direction the tiger had gone, for there were 
no trees on which I could sit near the field, and it was my 
intention to intercept the tiger on its way back. The hill was 
criss-crossed with cattle paths but the ground was too hard to 
show pug marks, and after circling round the village twice I 
eventually tried the rainwater channel. Here on the soft damp 
ground I found the pug marks of a big male tiger. These pug- 
marks showed that the tiger had gone up the channel after his 
feed, so it was reasonable to assume that he would return the 
same way. Growing out of the bank, on the same side of the 
channel as the hut and about thirty yards from it, was a 
gnarled and stunted oak tree smothered by a wild rose creeper. 
Laying down the rifle, I stepped from the bank on to the tree, 
which was leaning out over the channel, and found there was a 
reasonably comfortable seat on the top of the creeper. 

Rejoining the two men at the hut I told them I was going back 
to the Rest House for my heavy rifle, a double-barrelled -500 
express using modified cordite. My guide very sportingly 
offered to save me this trouble, so after instructing him I sat 
down with the villager at the door of his hut and listened to the 



tales he had to tell of a poor but undaunted man's fight against 
nature and wild animals, to keep a grass roof above his head. 
When I asked him why he did not leave this isolated place and 
try to make a living elsewhere, he said simply. This is my 
home.' 

The sun was near setting when I saw two men coming down 
the hill towards the hut. Neither of them had a rifle, but Bala 
Singh— one of the best men who ever stepped out of Garhwal, 
and of whose tragic death some years later I have already told 
you— was carrying a lantern. On reaching me Bala Singh said 
he had not brought my heavy rifle because the cartridges for it 
were locked up in my suitcase and I had forgotten to send the 
key. Well, the tiger would have to be shot with my new rifle, 
and it could not have a better christening. 

Before taking my seat on the tree I told the owner of the hut 
that my success would depend on his keeping his two children, 
a girl of eight and a boy of six, quiet, and that his wife would 
have to defer cooking the evening meal until I had shot the 
tiger, or until I decided the tiger was not coming. 

My instructions to Bala Singh were to keep the inmates of the 
hut quiet, light the lantern when I whistled, and then await my 
further orders. 

The vesper songs of the multitude of birds in the valley were 
hushed as the red glow from the setting sun died off the hills. 
Twilight deepened and a horned owl hooted on the hill above 
me. There would be a short period of semi-darkness before the 
moon rose. The time had now come, and the inmates of the hut 
were as silent as the dead. I was gripping the rifle and 
straining my eyes on the ground under me when the tiger, who 
had avoided passing under my tree, arrived at his kill and was 
angry at what he found. In a low muttering voice he cursed the 
vultures who, though they had departed two hours earlier, had 
left their musky smell on the ground they had fouled. For two, 
three, possibly four minutes he continued to mutter to himself, 
and then there was silence. The light was getting stronger. 



Another few minutes and the moon rose over the brow of the 
hill, flooding my world with light. The bones picked clean by 
the vultures were showing white in the moonlight, and 
nowhere was the tiger to be seen. Moistening my lips, which 
excitement had dried, I gave a low whistle. Bala Singh was on 
the alert and I heard him ask the owner of the hut for a light 
from the fire. Through the crevices of the grass hut I saw a 
glimmer of light, which grew stronger as the lantern was lit. 

The light moved across the hut and Bala Singh pulled open the 
door and stood on the threshold awaiting my further orders. 
With the exception of that one low whistle, I had made no 
sound or movement from the time I had taken my seat on the 
tree. And now, when I looked down, there was the tiger 
standing below me, in brilliant moonlight, looking over his right 
shoulder at Bala Singh. The distance between the muzzle of my 
rifle and the tiger's head was about five feet, and the thought 
flashed through my mind that the cordite would probably singe 
his hair. The ivory foresight of my rifle was on the exact spot of 
the tiger's heart— where I knew my bullet would kill him 
instantaneously— when I gently pressed the trigger. The 
trigger gave under the pressure, and nothing happened. 

Heavens! How incredibly careless I had been. I distinctly 
remembered having put a clip of five cartridges in the 
magazine when I took my seat on the tree, but quite evidently 
when I pushed the bolt home it had failed to convey a cartridge 
from the magazine into the chamber, and this I had omitted to 
observe. Had the rifle been old and worn it might still have 
been possible to rectify my mistake. But the rifle was new and 
as I raised the lever to draw back the bolt there was a loud 
metallic click, and in one bound the tiger was up the bank and 
out of sight. Turning my head to see how Bala Singh had 
reacted, I saw him step back into the hut and close the door. 

There was now no longer any need for silence and as Bala 
Singh came up at my call, to help me off the tree, I drew back 
the bolt of the rifle with the object of unloading the magazine 
and, as I did so, I noticed that, the extractor at the end of the 



bolt held a cartridge. So the rifle had been loaded after all and 
the safety-catch off. Why then had the rifle not fired when I 
pulled the trigger? Too late, I knew the reason. One of the 
recommendations stressed by Manton's manager when 
showing me the rifle was that it had a double pull off. Never 
having handled a rifle with this so-called improvement, I did 
not know it was necessary, after the initial pull had taken up 
the slack, to pull the trigger a second time to release the 
striker. When I explained the reason for my failure to Bala 
Singh, he blamed himself, 'for', said he, 'if I had brought your 
heavy rifle andthe suitcase this would not have happened 1 . I 
was inclined to agree with him at the time, but as the days 
went by I was not so sure that even with the heavy rifle I would 
have been able to kill the tiger that evening. 

4 

Another long walk next morning, to try to get news of the man- 
eater, and when I returned to the Rest House I was greeted by 
a very agitated man who informed me that the tiger had Just 
killed one of his cows. He had been grazing his cattle on the far 
side of the valley from where I sat the previous evening, when 
a tiger appeared and killed a red cow that had calved a few 
days previously. 'And now,' he said, 'the heifer calf will die, for 
none of my other cows are in milk. 1 

Luck had been with the tiger the previous evening but his luck 
could not last indefinitely, and for the killing of this cow he 
would have to die, for cattle are scarce in the hills and the loss 
of a milch cow to a poor man was a serious matter. The man 
had no anxiety about the rest of his small herd, which had 
stampeded back to his village, so he was willing to wait while I 
had a meal. At 1 p.m. we set out, the man leading, I on his 
heels, and two of my men following with material for making 
a machan. 

From an open patch of ground on the hillside my guide pointed 
out the lay of the land. His cattle had been grazing on a short 
stretch of grass a quarter of a mile below the ridge, when the 


tiger, coming up from the direction of the valley, had killed his 
cow. The rest of the herd had stampeded up the hill and over 
the ridge to his village, which was on the far side. Our shortest 
way was across the valley and up the other side, but I did not 
want to risk disturbing the tiger, so we skirted round the head 
of the valley to approach from above the spot where the cow 
had been killed. Between the ridge over which the cattle had 
stampeded and the spot where they had been grazing, was 
more or less open tree jungle. The tracks of the running 
animals had bitten deep into the soft loamy earth, and it was 
easy to follow these tracks back to where they had started. 

Here there was a big pool of blood with a drag-mark leading 
away from it. The drag led across the hill for 200 yards to a 
deep and well-wooded ravine, with a trickle of water in it. Up 
this ravine the tiger had taken his kill. 

The cow had been killed at about 10 a.m. on open ground, and 
the tiger's first anxiety would have been to remove it to some 
secluded spot where it would be hidden from prying eyes. So 
he had dragged it up the ravine and, after depositing it in a 
place he knew of, he had, as his pug-marks showed, gone down 
the ravine into the valley below. In an area in which human 
beings and cattle are moving about, it is unwise to predict 
where a tiger will be lying up, for the slightest disturbance may 
make him change his position. So, though the pug-marks led 
down the ravine, the three men and I very cautiously followed 
the drag up the ravine. 

Two hundred yards below the ridge along which we had come, 
rainwater had scooped out a big hole in the hillside. Here the 
ravine started. The hole, which at the upper end had a sheer 
drop into it of fifteen feet, had been made many years 
previously and was now partly overgrown with oak and ash 
saplings ten to twelve feet tall. Between these saplings and the 
fifteen-foot drop was a small open space on which the tiger had 
deposited his kill. I could sympathize with the owner of the cow 
when he told me with tears in his eyes that the fine animal that 
lay dead before us had been bred by him and that it was a 



special favourite. No portion of the animal had been touched, 
the tiger having evidently brought it here to eat at his leisure. 

A place had now to be found in which to sit. There were several 
big oak trees on either side of the ravine, but none overlooked 
the kill and all of them were unclimbable. Thirty yards below 
the kill and on the left-hand side of the ravine was a small stout 
holly tree. The branches were growing out at right angles to 
the trunk, and six feet above ground there was a strong enough 
branch for me to sit on and another on which to rest my feet. 
The three men protested strongly against my sitting so close to 
the ground. However, there was no other suitable place for me 
to sit, so the holly tree it would have to be. Before sending the 
men away I instructed them to go to the hut where I had been 
the previous evening, and to wait there until I called to them, 
or until I joined them. The distance across the valley was about 
half a mile and though the men would not be able to see either 
me or the kill, I was able to see the hut through the leaves of 
the holly tree. 

The men left me at 4 p.m. and I settled down on the holly 
branch for what I anticipated would be a long wait, for the hill 
faced west and the tiger would probably not be on the move 
much before sundown. To the left my field of vision— through 
the holly leaves— extended down the ravine for fifty yards. In 
front I had a clear view into the ravine, which was about ten 
feet deep and twenty feet wide, and of the hill facing me on 
which there were outcrops of rock but no trees. To the right I 
had a clear view up to the ridge but I could not see the kill, 
which was hidden by the thick growth of saplings. Behind me 
was a dense thicket of ringalswhich extended down to the level 
of my tree and further helped to mask the kill. The tiger after 
depositing his kill in the hole, made by rainwater, had gone 
down the ravine and it was reasonable to assume that when he 
returned he would come by the same route. So I concentrated 
all my attention on the ravine, intending to shoot the tiger 
when he was at right angles to me. That I could kill him at that 
short range I had no doubt whatsoever and to make quite sure 



of getting in a second shot, if it was necessary, I cocked both 
hammers of my rifle. 

There were sambhar, kakar, and langur in the jungle and a 
great number of pheasants, magpies, babblers, thrushes, and 
jays, all of which call on seeing a member of the cat family, so I 
thought I would receive ample warning of the tiger's coming. 
But here I was wrong, for without having heard a single alarm 
call, I suddenly heard the tiger at his kill. After going down the 
ravine, possibly for a drink, the tiger had skirted round the 
thicket of ringals and approached his kill without passing me. 
This did not worry me unduly for tigers are restless at a kill in 
daylight, and I felt sure that sooner or later the tiger would 
show up on the open ground in front of me. He had been eating 
for about fifteen minutes, tearing off great chunks of flesh, 
when I caught sight of a bear coming along the crest of the hill 
from left to right. He was a great big Himalayan black bear, 
and was strolling along as though it did not matter to him how 
long he took to get from here to there. Suddenly he stopped, 
turned facing downhill, and lay flat. After a minute or two he 
raised his head, snuffed the wind, and again lay flat. The wind, 
as always in daylight in the hills, was blowing uphill and the 
bear had got the scent of flesh and blood, mingled with the 
scent of tiger. I was a little to the right of the kill, so he had not 
got my scent. Presently he got to his feet and, with the bent 
legs and body held close to the ground, started to stalk the 
tiger. 

It was a revelation to me in animal stalking to see that bear 
coming down the hill. He had possibly two hundred yards to go 
and though he was not built for stalking, as tigers and leopards 
are, he covered the distance as smoothly as a snake and as 
silently as a shadow. The nearer he got the more cautious he 
became. I could see the lip of the fifteen-foot drop into the hole, 
and when the bear got to within a few feet of this spot he drew 
himself along with belly to ground. Waiting until the tiger was 
eating with great gusto, the bear very slowly projected his head 
over the lip of the hole and looked down, and then as slowly 



drew his head back. Excitement with me had now reached the 
stage when the whole of my body was trembling, and my mouth 
and throat were dry. 

On two occasions I have seen Himalayan bears walk off with 
tigers' kills. On both occasions the tigers were not present. And 
on two occasions I have seen bears walk up to feeding leopards 
and, after shooing them off, carry the kills away. But on this 
occasion the tiger— and a big male at that— was present at his 
kill and, further, he was not an animal to be shooed away like a 
leopard. At the back of my mind was the thought that surely 
this bear would not be so foolish as to try to dispossess the king 
of the jungle of his kill. But that was just what the bear 
appeared to intend doing, and his opportunity came when the 
tiger was cracking a bone. Whether the bear had been waiting 
for this moment I do not know; anyway, while the tiger was 
crunching the bone, the bear drew himself to the edge and, 
gathering his feet under him, launched himself into the hole 
with a mighty scream. The object of the scream I imagine was 
to intimidate the tiger, but so far from having this effect it 
appeared to infuriate him, for the bear's mighty scream was 
answered by an even mightier roar from the tiger. 

Fights in the wild are very rare and this is only the second case 
I know of different species of animals fighting for the sake of 
fighting and not for the purpose of one using the other as food. 

I did not see the fight, for the reasons I have given, but I heard 
every detail of it. Waged in a hollow of restricted area the 
sound was terrifying and I was thankful that the fight was a 
straight one between two contestants who were capable of 
defending themselves, and not a three-cornered one in which I 
was involved. Time stands still when every drop of blood racing 
through a rapidly beating heart is tingling with excitement. The 
fight may have lasted three minutes, or it may have lasted 
longer. Anyway, when the tiger considered he had administered 
sufficient chastisement he broke off the engagement and came 
along the open ground in front of me at a fast gallop, closely 
followed by the still screaming bear. Just as I was aligning the 



sights of my rifle on the tiger's left shoulder he turned sharp to 
the left and leaping the twenty-foot-wide ravine, landed at my 
feet. While he was still in the air I depressed the muzzle of the 
rifle and fired, as I thought, straight into his back. My shot was 
greeted with an angry grunt as the tiger crashed into 
the ringals behind me. For a few yards he carried on and then 
there was silence; shot through the heart and died in his 
tracks, I thought. 

A -500 modified cordite rifle fired anywhere makes a 
considerable noise, but here, in the ravine, it sounded like a 
cannon. The detonation, however, had not the least effect on 
the maddened bear. Following close on the heels of the tiger he 
did not attempt to leap the ravine, as the tiger had done. 
Storming down one bank he came up the other straight 
towards me. I had no wish to shoot an animal that had the 
courage to drive a tiger off his kill, but to have let that 
screaming fury come any nearer would have been madness, so, 
when he was a few feet from me, I put the bullet of the left 
barrel into his broad forehead. Slowly he slid down the bank on 
his stomach, until his haunches met the opposite bank. 

Where a moment earlier the jungle had resounded with angry 
strife and the detonations of a heavy rifle, there was now 
silence, and when my heart had resumed its normal beat, my 
thoughts turned to a soothing smoke. Laying the rifle across 
my knees I put both hands into my pockets to feel for cigarette 
case and matches. At that moment I caught sight of a 
movement on my right and, turning my head, saw the tiger 
unhurriedly cantering along on the open ground over which he 
had galloped a minute or two earlier and looking not at me, but 
at his dead enemy. 

I know that in relating these events as they occurred, 
sportsmen will accuse me of rank bad shooting and gross 
carelessness. I have no defence to make against the accusation 
of bad shooting, but I do not plead guilty to carelessness. When 
I fired, as I thought, into the tiger's back, I was convinced I was 



delivering a fatal wound, and the angry response followed by 
the mad rush and sudden cessation of sound were ample 
justification for thinking the tiger had died in his tracks. My 
second shot had killed the bear outright so there was no 
necessity— while I was still on the tree— to reload the rifle 
before laying it across my knees. 

Surprise at seeing the tiger alive and unhurt lost me a second 
or two, and thereafter I acted quickly. The rifle was of the 
under-lever model; the lever being held in position by two lugs 
on the trigger guard. This made the rapid loading of the rifle 
difficult, and, further, the spare cartridges were in my trousers 
pocket; easy to get at when standing up, but not so easy when 
sitting on a thin branch. Whether the tiger knew the bear was 
dead, or whether he was just keeping an eye on it to avoid a 
flank attack, I do not know. Anyway, he carried on across the 
face of the steep hill at a slow canter and had reached a spot 
forty yards away— which I can best describe as eleven o'clock 
— and was passing a great slab of rock when, with only one 
barrel loaded, I put up the rifle and fired. At my shot he reared 
up, fell over sideways, made a bad landing, scrambled to his 
feet, and cantered on round the shoulder of the hill with his tail 
in the air. The nickel-cased soft-nosed bullet with steel base 
had struck the rock a few inches from the tiger's face and the 
blow-back had thrown him off his balance but had done him no 
harm. 

After a quiet smoke I stepped down from the holly tree and 
went to have a look at the bear, who, I found, was even bigger 
than I had at first thought. His self-sought fight with the tiger 
had been a very real one, for blood from a number of deep cuts 
was seeping through the thick fur on his neck and in several 
places his scalp was torn right down to the bone. These wounds 
in themselves would have mattered little to a tough animal like 
a bear, but what did matter and what had annoyed him was the 
injury to his nose. All males resent being struck on the nose, 
and not only had the bear been struck on that tender spot but 
insult had been added to injury by his nose being torn in half. 



Reason enough for him to have chased the tiger with murder in 
his eyes, and for him to have ignored the report of my heavy 
rifle. 

There was not sufficient time for me to call up my men to skin 
the bear, so I set off to collect them at the hut and get back to 
the Rest House before nightfall, for somewhere in that area 
there was a man-eater. My men, and the dozen or so villagers 
who had collected at the hut, were too intent on gazing across 
the valley to observe my approach, and when I walked in 
among them, they were dumb with amazement. Bala Singh was 
the first to recover speech, and when I heard his story I was 
not surprised that the assembled men had looked at me as one 
returned from the dead. 'We advised you,' Bala Singh said, 'not 
to sit so close to the ground, and when we heard your first 
scream, followed by the tiger's roar, we were convinced that 
yon had been pulled out of the tree and that you were fighting 
for your life with the tiger. Then, when the tiger stopped 
roaring and you continued to scream, we thought the tiger was 
carrying you away. Later we heard two reports from your rifle, 
followed by a third, and we were greatly mystified, for we could 
not understand how a man who was being carried away by a 
tiger could fire his rifle. And while we were consulting with 
these men what we should do, you suddenly appeared and we 
became speechless.' To men keyed-up and listening for sounds 
from where a tiger was being sat up for, the scream of a bear 
could easily be mistaken for the scream of a human being, for 
the two are very similar and at a distance would not be 
distinguishable from one another. 

Bala Singh got a cup of tea ready for me while I told the men 
about the fight they had heard and about the bear I had shot. 
Bear's fat is greatly valued as a cure for rheumatism, and the 
men were delighted when I told them I did not want the fat and 
that they could share it with their friends. Next morning I set 
out to skin the bear, accompanied by a crowd of men who were 
anxious not only to get a share of the fat but also to see the 
animal that had fought a tiger. I have never measured or 



weighed a bear but have seen quite a few, and the one I 
skinned that morning was the biggest and the fattest 
Himalayan bear I have ever seen. When the fat and the other 
prized parts of the bear had been divided, a very happy throng 
of men turned their faces to Dabidhura, and the happiest and 
the most envied of all was Bala Singh who proudly carried, 
strapped to his back, the bear's skin I had given him. 

The tiger did not return to finish his interrupted meal, and by 
evening the vultures had picked clean the bones of the cow and 
the bear. 

5 

Skinning a bear encased in fat is a very messy job, and as I 
plodded back to the Rest House for a hot bath and a late 
breakfast I met a very agitated forest guard, whose 
headquarters were at Dabidhura. He had been at an outlying 
beat the previous night and on his return to Dabidhura that 
morning had heard at the bania's shop about the bear I had 
shot. Being in urgent need of bear's fat for his father, who was 
crippled with rheumatism, he was hurrying to try to get a share 
of the fat when he ran into a herd of stampeding cattle, 
followed by a boy who informed him that a tiger had killed one 
of his cows. The forest guard had a rough idea where the cattle 
had been grazing when attacked by the tiger, so while Bala 
Singh and the other men carried onto Dabidhura I set off with 
him to try to find the kill. Uphill and downhill we went for two 
miles or more until we came to a small valley. It was in this 
valley that the forest guard thought the cow-had been killed. 

There had been an auction of condemned stores at the Gurkha 
depot at Almora a few days previously, and my companion had 
treated himself to a pair of army boots many sizes too big for 
his feet. In these he had clumped ahead of me until we came to 
the lip of the valley. Here I made him remove his boots and 
when I saw the condition of his feet I marvelled that a man who 
had gone barefoot all his life had, for the sake of vanity, 
endured such torture. 'I bought big boots, 1 he told me, 'because 


I thought they would shrink. 1 

The boat-shaped valley some five acres in extent, was like a 
beautiful park dotted over with giant oak trees. On the side 
from which I approached it the ground sloped gently down and 
was free of bushes, but on the far side the hill went up more 
steeply with a few scattered bushes on it. I stood on the lip of 
the valley for a few minutes scanning every foot of ground in 
my field of vision without seeing anything suspicious, and then 
went down the grassy slope followed by the forest guard, now 
walking silently on bare feet. As I approached the flat ground 
on the floor of the valley I saw that the dead leaves and dry 
twigs over a considerable area had been scratched together, 
and piled into a great heap. Though no part of the cow was 
visible I knew that under this pile of dead matter the tiger had 
hidden his kill, and very foolishly I did not inform my 
companion of this fact, for he told me later that he did not 
know that tigers were in the habit of hiding their kills. When a 
tiger hides his kill it is usually an indication that he does not 
intend lying up near it, but it is not safe to assume this always. 
So, though I had scanned the ground before entering the valley, 
I again stood perfectly still while I had another look. 

A little beyond the piled-up leaves and twigs the hill went up at 
an angle of forty-five degrees, and forty yards up the hillside 
there was a small clump of bushes. As I was looking at these I 
saw the tiger, who was lying on a small bit of flat ground with 
his feet towards me, turn over and present his back to me. I 
could see part of his head, and a three-inch wide strip of his 
body from shoulder to hindquarters. A head shot was out of the 
question, and nothing would be gained by inflicting a flesh 
wound. I had the whole afternoon and evening before me and 
as the tiger would be bound to stand up sooner or later, I 
decided to sit down and wait on events. As I came to this 
decision I caught sight of a movement on my left, and on 
turning my head saw a bear coming stealthily up the valley 
towards the kill, followed by two half-grown cubs. The bear had 
evidently heard the tiger killing the cow and after giving the 



tiger time to settle down— as I have done on many occasions— 
she was now coming to investigate, for unless they have a 
special reason bears do not move about at midday Had I been 
standing on the lip of the valley instead of a few feet from the 
kill, I believe I should have witnessed a very interesting sight, 
for on finding the kill, which with their keen scent they would 
have had no difficulty in doing, the bears would have started to 
uncover it. This would have awakened the tiger and I cannot 
imagine that he would have relinquished his kill without a 
fight, and the fight would have been worth seeing. 

The forest guard, who all this time had been standing quietly 
behind me seeing nothing but the ground at his feet, now 
caught sight of the bears and exclaimed in a loud voice, 'Dekho 
Sahib, bhalu, bhalu' . The tiger was up and away in a flash, but 
he had some twenty yards of open ground to cover, and as I 
aligned my sights on him and pressed the trigger the forest 
guard, under the impression that I was facing in the wrong 
direction, grabbed my arm and gave it a jerk with the result 
that my bullet struck a tree a few yards from where I was 
standing. Losing one's temper anywhere does no good, least of 
all in a jungle. The forest guard, who did not know what the 
piled-up leaves implied and who had not seen the tiger, was 
under the impression that he had saved my life by drawing my 
attention to the dreaded bears, so there was nothing to be said. 
Alarmed by my shot the bears lumbered away while my 
companion urged me with a catch in his 
throat, 'Maro, maroL ('Shoot, shoot!'). 

A very dejected forest guard walked back with me to 
Dabidhura, and to cheer him up I asked him if he knew of any 
place where I could shoot a ghooral, for my men were still 
without meat. Not only did the game little man know of such a 
place but he also volunteered, blisters and all, to take me to it. 
So after a cup of tea we set off accompanied by two of my men 
who, the forest guard said, would be needed to carry back the 
bag. 



From the veranda of the Rest House the hill falls steeply away. 
Down this hill the forest guard led me for a few hundred yards 
until we came to a foot-wide ghooral track running across the 
face of the hill. I now took the lead and had proceeded for 
about half a mile to the right when, on coming to a rocky ridge, 
I looked across a deep ravine and saw a ghooral on the far side 
standing on a projecting rock and looking into space, as all 
goats including thar, ibex, and markor have a habit of doing. It 
was a male ghooral, as I could see from the white disk on its 
throat, and the distance between us was a shade over two 
hundred yards. Here now was an opportunity not only of 
procuring meat for my men but also of testing the accuracy of 
my new rifle. So, lying down, I put up the two hundred-yard 
leaf sight and, taking very careful aim, fired. At my shot 
the ghooral sank down on the rock on which he had been 
standing, which was very fortunate, for below him was a sheer 
drop of many hundred feet. A second ghooral, which I had not 
seen, now ran up the far side of the ravine followed by a small 
kid, and after standing still and looking back at us several 
times, carried on round the shoulder of the hill. 

While the forest guard and I had a smoke, my two men set off 
to retrieve the bag. Deprived of his share of the bear's fat the 
forest guard was made happy by being promised a bit of the 
ghooral and its skin, which he said he would make into a seat 
for his father who, owing to age and rheumatism, spent all his 
days basking in the sun. 

6 

A visit to the valley early next morning confirmed my suspicion 
that the tiger would not return to his kill, and that the bears 
would. Little but the bones were left when the three bears had 
finished with the kill, and that little was being industriously 
sought by a solitary king vulture when I arrived on the scene. 

The morning was still young so, climbing the hill in the 
direction in which the tiger had gone the previous day, I went 
over the ridge and down the far side to the Loharghat road to 


look for tracks of the man-eating leopard. On my return to the 
Rest House at midday I was informed of yet another tiger kill. 
My informant was an intelligent young man who was on his 
way to Almora to attend a court case and, being unable to 
spare the time to show me where he had seen the tiger killing a 
cow, drew a sketch for me on the floor of the veranda with a 
piece of charcoal. After a combined breakfast and lunch I set 
out to try to find the kill which— if the young man's sketch was 
correct— had taken place five miles from where I had fired at 
the tiger the previous day. The tiger, I found, had come on a 
small herd of cattle grazing on the banks of the stream flowing 
down the main valley and, judging from the condition of the 
soft ground, had experienced some difficulty in pulling down 
the victim he had selected. Killing a big and vigorous animal 
weighing six or seven hundred pounds is a strenuous job and a 
tiger after accomplishing this feat usually takes a breather. On 
this occasion, however, the tiger had picked up the cow as soon 
as he had killed it— as the absence of blood indicated— and 
crossing the stream entered the dense jungle at the foot of the 
hill. 

Yesterday the tiger had covered up his kill at the spot where he 
had done his killing, but today it appeared to be his intention to 
remove his kill to as distant a place as possible from the scene 
of killing. For two miles or more I followed the drag up the 
steep face of the densely wooded hill to where the tiger, when 
he had conveyed his heavy burden to within a few hundred 
yards of the crest, had got one of the cow's hind legs fixed 
between two oak saplings. With a mighty jerk uphill, the tiger 
tore the leg off a little below the hock, and leaving that fixed 
between the saplings went on with his kill. The crest of the hill 
at the point where the tiger arrived with his kill was flat and 
overgrown with oak saplings a foot or two feet in girth. Under 
these trees, where there were no bushes or cover of any kind, 
the tiger left his kill without making any attempt to cover it up. 

I had followed the drag slowly, carrying only my rifle and a few 
cartridges; even so, when I arrived at the crest my shirt was 



wet and my throat dry. I could imagine, therefore, the thirst 
that the tiger must have acquired and his desire to quench it. 
Being in need of a drink myself I set out to find the nearest 
water, where there was also a possibility of finding the tiger. 
The ravine in which I had shot the bear was half a mile to the 
right and had water in it, but there was another ravine closer 
to the left and I decided to try that first. 

I had gone down this ravine for the best part of a mile and had 
come to a place where it narrowed with steep shaly banks on 
either side when, on going round a big rock, I saw the tiger 
lying in front of me at a range of twenty yards. There was a 
small pool of water at this spot, and lying on a narrow strip of 
sand between the pool and the right-hand bank was the tiger. 
Here the ravine took a sharp turn to the right, and part of the 
tiger was on my side of the turn and part round the bend. He 
was lying on his left side with his back to the pool and I could 
see his tail and part of his hind legs. Between me and the 
sleeping animal was a great mass of dry branches that had 
been lopped from overhanging trees some time previously to 
feed buffaloes. It was not possible to negotiate this obstacle 
without making a noise, nor was it possible to go along either 
of the steep banks without causing small landslides of shale. So 
the only thing to do was to sit down and wait for the tiger to 
give me a shot. 

After his great exertion and a good drink, the tiger was 
sleeping soundly and for half an hour he made no movement. 
Then he turned on to his right side and a little more of his legs 
came into view. In this position he lay for a few minutes and 
then stood up, and withdrew round the bend. With finger on 
trigger I waited for him to reappear, for his kill was up the hill 
behind me. Minutes passed and then a kakar a hundred yards 
away went dashing down the hill barking hysterically, and a 
little later a sambhar belled. The tiger had gone; why, I did not 
know, for he had already taken as much exercise as any tiger 
needed to take, and it was not a case of his having scented me, 
for tigers have no sense of smell. It did not matter, however, for 



presently he would return to the kill he had been at such pains 
to take to the top of the hill, and I would be there to receive 
him. The water in the pool where the tiger had drunk was ice- 
cold, and having slaked my thirst I was able to enjoy a long- 
deferred smoke. 

The sun was near setting when I made myself comfortable on 
an oak tree ten yards to the east and a little to the right of the 
kill. The tiger would come up the hill from the west and it was 
not advisable to have the kill directly between us, for tigers 
have very good eyesight. From my seat on the tree I had a clear 
view of the valley and of the hills beyond; and when the setting 
sun, showing as a great ball of fire, was resting on the rim of 
the earth bathing the world in red, a sambhar belled in the 
valley below me. The tiger was on the move and there was 
plenty of lime for him to arrive at his kill while there was still 
sufficient daylight for accurate shooting. 

The ball of fire dipped below the horizon; the red glow died of 
the earth; twilight gave place to darkness; and all was silent in 
the jungle. The moon was in its third quarter, but the stars— 
nowhere more brilliant than in the Himalayas— were giving 
enough light for me to see the kill, which was white. The head 
of the kill was towards me and if the tiger came now and 
started to eat at the hindquarters I would not be able to see 
him, but by aligning my sights on the white kill and then 
raising the rifle and pressing the trigger, as the kill 
disappeared from view, there was a fifty-fifty chance of hitting 
the tiger. But here was no man-eater to be fired at under any 
conditions. Here was a 'temple' tiger who had never molested 
human beings and who, though he had killed four head of cattle 
in four consecutive days, had committed no crime against the 
jungle code. To kill him outright would benefit those who were 
suffering from his depredations, but to take an uncertain shot 
at night with the possibility of only wounding him and leaving 
him to suffer for hours, or if unrecovered to become a man- 
eater, was not justifiable in any circumstances. 



Light was coming in the east, for the boles of the trees were 
beginning to cast vague shadows, and then the moon rose, 
flooding the open patches of the jungle with light. It was then 
that the tiger came. I could not see him but I knew he had 
come for I could feel and sense his presence. Was he crouching 
on the far side of the kill with just his eyes and the top of his 
head raised over the brow of the hill watching me? No, that 
was not possible, for from the time I had made myself 
comfortable on my seat I had become part of the tree and 
tigers do not go through a jungle scanning, without a reason, 
every tree they approach. And yet, the tiger was here, and he 
was looking at me. 

There was sufficient light now for me to see clearly, and very 
carefully I scanned the ground in front of me. Then as I turned 
my head to the right, to look behind, I saw the tiger. He was 
sitting on his hunkers in a patch of moonlight, facing the kill, 
with his head turned looking up at me. When he saw me 
looking down on him he flattened his ears, and as I made no 
further movement, his ears regained their upright position. I 
could imagine him saying to himself, 'Well, you have now seen 
me, and what are you going to do about it ? 1 There was little I 
could do about it, for in order to get a shot I would have to turn 
a half-circle and it would not be possible to do this without 
alarming the tiger, who was looking at me from a range of 
fifteen feet. There was, however, just a possibility of my getting 
a shot from my left shoulder, and this I decided to try to do. The 
rifle was resting on my knees with the muzzle pointing to the 
left, and as I lifted it and started turning it to the right the tiger 
lowered his head and again flattened his ears. In this position 
he remained as long as I was motionless, but the moment I 
started to move the rifle again, he was up and away into the 
shadows behind. 

Well, that was that, and the tiger had very definitely won 
another round. As long as I sat on the tree he would not return, 
but if I went away he might come back and remove the kill; and 
as he could not eat a whole cow in a night I would have another 



chance next day. 

The question that now faced me was where to spend the night. 

I had already walked some twenty miles that day and the 
prospect of doing another eight miles to the Rest House- 
through forest all the way— did not appeal to me. In any other 
locality I would have moved away from the kill for two or three 
hundred yards and slept peacefully on the ground, but in this 
locality there was a man-eating leopard, and man-eating 
leopards hunt at night. While sitting on the tree earlier in the 
evening, I had heard the distant pealing of cattle-bells, coming 
either from a village or from a cattle-station. I had pin-pointed 
the sound and I now set out to find where it had come from. 
Cattle-lifting is unknown in the Himalayas, and throughout 
Kumaon there are communal cattle-stations situated in the 
jungles close to the grazing grounds. I traced the bells I had 
heard to one of these stations, in which there were about a 
hundred head of cattle in a large open shed surrounded by a 
strong stockade. The fact that the station was in the depth of 
the jungle, and unguarded, was proof of the honesty of the 
hillfolk, and it was also proof that until my arrival cattle in the 
Dabidhura area had not been molested by tigers. 

At night all animals in the jungle are suspicious, and if I was to 
spend the night under the protection of the inmates of the shed 
I would have to disarm their very natural suspicion. The 
tenants of our village at Kaladhungi keep about nine hundred 
head of cows and buffaloes, and having been associated with 
cattle from my earliest childhood I know the language they 
understand. Moving very slowly and speaking to the cattle I 
approached the shed, and on reaching the stockade sat down 
with my back to it to have a smoke. Several cows were 
standing near the spot where I sat and one of them now 
advanced and, putting its head through the bars of the 
stockade, started to lick the back of my head; a friendly 
gesture, but a wetting one, and here at an altitude of eight 
thousand feet the nights were cold. Having finished my 
cigarette, I unloaded my rifle and, covering it with straw. 



climbed the stockade. 


Care was needed in selecting a place on which to sleep, for if 
there was an alarm during the night and the cattle started 
milling round it would be unsafe to be caught on the ground. 
Near the centre of the shed, and close to one of the roof- 
supports up which I could go if the need arose, there was an 
open space between two sleeping cows. Stepping over 
recumbent animals and moving the heads of standing ones to 
get past them, I lay down between the two that were lying back 
to back. There was no alarm during the night, so the necessity 
for me to shin up the roof-support did not arise, and with the 
warm bodies of the cows to keep off the night chills and with 
the honey-sweet smell of healthy cattle in my nostrils I slept as 
one at peace with all the world, tigers and man-eating leopards 
included. 

The sun was just rising next morning when, on hearing voices, I 
opened my eyes and saw three men, armed with milking pails, 
staring at me through the bars of the stockade. The water I had 
drunk at the tiger's pool was all that had passed my lips since 
breakfast the previous day, and the warm drink of milk the men 
gave me— after they had recovered from their amazement at 
finding me asleep with their cattle— was very welcome. 
Declining the men's invitation to accompany them back to their 
village for a meal, I thanked them for their board and lodging 
and, before returning to the Rest House for a bath and a square 
meal, set off to see where the tiger had taken his kill. To my 
surprise I found the kill lying just as I had left it, and after 
covering it over with branches to protect it from vultures and 
golden-headed eagles I went on to the Rest House. 

In no other part of the world, I imagine, are servants as 
tolerant of the vagaries of their masters as in India. When I 
returned to the Rest House after an absence of twenty-four 
hours, no surprise was expressed, and no questions asked. A 
hot bath was ready, clean clothes laid out, and within a very 
short time I was sitting down to a breakfast of porridge. 



scrambled eggs, hot chapatis and honey— the last a present 
from the old priest— and a dish of tea. Breakfast over, I sat on 
the grass in front of the Rest House admiring the gorgeous 
view and making plans. I had set out from my home in Naini Tal 
with one object, and one object only, to try to shoot the Panar 
man-eating leopard; and from the night it had tried to drag the 
herdsman off the temple platform nothing had been heard of it. 
The priest, the bania, and all the people in near and distant 
villages that I questioned informed me that there were 
occasions when for long periods the man-eater seemed to 
disappear off the face of the earth and they were of the opinion 
that one of these periods had now started, but no one could say 
how long it would last. The area over which the man-eater was 
operating was vast, and in it there were possibly ten to twenty 
leopards. To find and shoot in that area one particular leopard 
— that had stopped killing human beings— without knowing 
where to look for it, was a hopeless job. 

My mission as far as the man-eater was concerned had failed, 
and no useful purpose would be served by my prolonging my 
stay at Dabidhura. The question of the temple tiger remained. I 
did not feel that the killing of this tiger was any responsibility 
of mine; but I did feel, and felt very strongly, that my pursuit of 
him was inducing him to kill more cattle than he would 
otherwise have done. Why a male tiger started killing cattle on 
the day of my arrival at Dabidhura it was not possible to say, 
and whether he would stop when I went away remained to be 
seen. Anyway, I had tried my best to shoot him; had paid 
compensation for the damage he had done to the full extent of 
my purse; and he had provided me with one of the most 
interesting jungle experiences I had ever had. So I harboured 
no resentment against him for having beaten me at every point 
in the exciting game we had played during the past four days. 
These four days had been very strenuous for me, so I would 
rest today and make an early start next morning on the first 
stage of my journey back to Naini Tal. I had just come to this 
decision when a voice from behind me said, 'Salaam, Sahib. I 



have come to tell you that the tiger has killed one of my cows.' 
One more chance of shooting the tiger, and whether I 
succeeded or not I would stick to my plan of leaving next 
morning. 

7 

Annoyed at the interference of human beings and bears, the 
tiger had shifted his ground, and this last kill had taken place 
on the eastern face of the Dabidhura mountain several miles 
from where I had sat up for him the previous evening. The 
ground here was undulating, with patches of scrub and a few 
odd trees dotted here and there; ideal ground for chukor (hill 
partridge), but the last place in which I would have expected to 
find a tiger. Running diagonally across the face of the mountain 
was a shallow depression. In this depression were patches of 
dense scrub, interspersed with open glades of short grass. At 
the edge of one of these glades the cow had been killed, 
dragged a few yards towards some bushes, and left in the open. 
On the opposite or downhill side of the glade to the kill, there 
was a big oak tree. On this tree, the only one for hundreds of 
yards around, I decided to sit. 

While my men warmed a kettle of water for tea I scouted round 
to see if I could get a shot at the tiger on foot. The tiger I felt 
sure was lying up somewhere in the depression, but though I 
searched every foot of it for an hour I saw no sign of him. 

The tree that was to provide me with a seat was leaning out 
towards the glade. Excessive lopping had induced a crop of 
small branches all along the trunk, which made the tree easy to 
climb but obscured a view of the trunk from above. Twenty feet 
up, a single big branch jutted out over the glade, offering the 
only seat on the tree but not a comfortable one or one easy to 
reach. At 4 p.m. I sent my men away, instructing them to go to 
a village farther up the hill and wait for me, for I had no 
intention of sitting up after sun-down. 

The kill, as I have said, was lying in the open, ten yards from 
me and with its hindquarters a yard or so from a dense clump 


of bushes. I had been in position for an hour and was watching 
a number of red-whiskered bulbuls feeding on a raspberry bush 
to my right front, when on turning my eyes to look at the kill I 
saw the tiger's head projecting beyond the clump of bushes. He 
was evidently lying down, for his head was close to the ground, 
and his eyes were fixed on me. Presently a paw was advanced, 
then another, and then very slowly and with belly to ground the 
tiger drew himself up to his kill. Here he lay for several 
minutes without movement. Then, feeling with his mouth, and 
with his eyes still fixed on me, he bit off the cow's tail, laid it on 
one side and started to eat. Having eaten nothing since his 
fight with the bear three days before, he was hungry, and he 
ate just as a man would eat an apple, ignoring the skin and 
taking great bites of flesh from the hindquarters. 

The rifle was across my knees pointing in the direction of the 
tiger, and all I had to do was to raise it to my shoulder. I would 
get an opportunity of doing this when he turned his eyes away 
from me for a brief moment. But the tiger appeared to know his 
danger, for without taking his eyes off me he ate on steadily 
and unhurriedly. When he had consumed about fifteen or 
twenty pounds of flesh, and when the bulbuls had left the 
raspberry bush and, joined by two black-throated jays, were 
making a great chattering on the bushes behind him, I thought 
it was time for me to act. If I raised the rifle very slowly he 
would probably not notice the movement so, when the birds 
were chattering their loudest, I started to do this. I had raised 
the muzzle possibly six inches, when the tiger slid backwards 
as if drawn back by a powerful spring. With rifle to shoulder 
and elbows on knees I now waited for the tiger to project his 
head a second time, and this I felt sure he would presently do. 
Minutes passed, and then I heard the tiger. He had skirted 
round the bushes and, approaching from behind, started to 
claw my tree where the thick growth of small branches on the 
trunk made it impossible for me to see him. Purring with 
pleasure the tiger once and again clawed the tree with vigour, 
while I sat on my branch and rocked with silent laughter. 



I know that crows and monkeys have a sense of humour, but 
until that day I did not know that tigers also possessed this 
sense. Nor did I know that an animal could have the luck, and 
the impudence, that particular tiger had. In five days he had 
killed five cows, four of them in broad daylight. In those five 
days I had seen him eight times and on four occasions I had 
pressed a trigger on him. And now, after staring at me for half 
an hour and eating while doing so, he was clawing the tree on 
which I was sitting and purring to show his contempt of me. 

When telling me of the tiger the old priest said, 'I have no 
objection. Sahib, to your trying to shoot this tiger but neither 
you nor anyone else will ever succeed in killing it.' The tiger 
was now, in his own way, confirming what the priest had said. 
Well, the tiger had made the last move in the exciting game we 
had played without injury to either of us, but I was not going to 
give him the satisfaction of having the last laugh. Laying down 
the rifle and cupping my hands I waited until he stopped 
clawing, and then sent a full-throated shout echoing over the 
hills which sent him careening down the hill at full speed and 
brought my men down from the village at a run. 'We saw the 
tiger running away with his tail in the air,' the men said when 
they arrived, 'and just see what he has done to the tree.' 

Next morning I bade farewell to all my friends at Dabidhura, 
and assured them I would return when the man-eater got 
active again. 

I visited Dabidhura several times in subsequent years while 
hunting man-eaters, and I never heard of anyone having killed 
the temple tiger. So I hope that in the fullness of time this old 
warrior, like an old soldier, just faded away. 



The Muktesar Man-Eater 

EIGHTEEN MILES TO THE NORTH— north-east of Naini Tal is 
a hill eight thousand feet high and twelve to fifteen miles long, 
running east and west. The western end of the hill rises steeply 
and near this end is the Muktesar Veterinary Research 
Institute, where lymph and vaccines are produced to fight 
India's cattle diseases. The laboratory and staff quarters are 
situated on the northern face of the hill and command one of 
the best views to be had anywhere of the Himalayan snowy 
range. This range, and all the hills that lie between it and the 
plains of India, run east and west, and from a commanding 
point on any of the hills an uninterrupted view can be obtained 
not only of the snows to the north but also of the hills and 
valleys to the east and to the west as far as the eye can see. 
People who have lived at Muktesar claim that it is the most 
beautiful spot in Kumaon, and that its climate has no equal. 

A tiger that thought as highly of the amenities of Muktesar as 
human beings did, took up her residence in the extensive 
forests adjoining the small settlement. Here she lived very 
happily on sambhar, kakar, and wild pig, until she had the 
misfortune to have an encounter with a porcupine. In this 
encounter she lost an eye and got some fifty quills, varying in 
length from one to nine inches, embedded in the arm and 
under the pad of her right foreleg. Several of these quills after 
striking a bone had doubled back in the form of a U, the point 
and the broken-off end being close together. Suppurating sores 
formed where she endeavoured to extract the quills with her 
teeth, and while she was lying up in a thick patch of grass, 
starving and licking her wounds, a woman selected this 
particular patch of grass to cut as fodder for her cattle. At first 
the tigress took no notice, but when the woman had cut the 
grass right up to where she was lying, the tigress struck once, 
the blow crushing the woman's skull. Death was instantaneous, 
for, when found the following day, she was grasping her sickle 
with one hand and holding a tuft of grass, which she was about 
to cut when struck, with the other. Leaving the woman lying 



where she had fallen, the tigress limped off for a distance of 
over a mile and took refuge in a little hollow under a fallen 
tree. Two days later a man came to chip firewood off this fallen 
tree, and the tigress who was lying on the far side killed him 
also. The man fell across the tree, and as he had removed his 
coat and shirt and the tigress had clawed his back while killing 
him, it is possible that the sight of blood trickling down his 
body as he hung across the bole of the tree first gave her the 
idea that he was something that she could satisfy her hunger 
with. However that may be, before leaving him she ate a small 
portion from his back. A day later she killed her third victim 
deliberately, and without having received any provocation. 
Thereafter she became an established man-eater. 

I heard of the tigress shortly after she started killing human 
beings, and as there were a number of sportsmen at Muktesar, 
all of whom in were keen on bagging the tigress— who was 
operating right on their doorsteps— I did not consider it would 
be sporting of an outsider to meddle in the matter. When the 
toll of human beings killed by the tigress had risen to twenty- 
four, however, and the lives of all the people living in the 
settlement and neighbouring villages were endangered and 
work at the Institute slowed down, the veterinary officer in 
charge of the Institute requested the Government to solicit my 
help. 

My task, as I saw it, was not going to be an easy one, for, apart 
from the fact that my experience of man-eaters was very 
limited, the extensive ground over which the tigress was 
operating was not known to me and I therefore had no idea 
where to look for her. 

Accompanied by a servant and two men carrying a roll of 
bedding and a suitcase, I left Naini Tal at midday and walked 
ten miles to the Ramgarh Dak Bungalow, where I spent the 
night. The Dak Bungalow khansama(cook, bottle-washer, and 
general factotum) was a friend of mine, and when he learnt 
that I was on my way to Muktesar to try to shoot the man-eater. 



he warned me to be very careful while negotiating the last two 
miles into Muktesar for, he said, several people had recently 
been killed on that stretch of road. 

Leaving my men to pack up and follow me I armed myself with 
a double-barrelled .500 express rifle using modified cordite, 
and making a very early start next morning arrived at the 
junction of the Naini Tal / Almora road with the Muktesar road 
just as it was getting light. From this point it was necessary to 
walk warily for I was now in the man-eater's country. Before 
zigzagging up the face of a very steep hill the road runs for 
some distance over flat ground on which grows the orange- 
coloured lily, the round hard seeds of which can be used as shot 
in a muzzle-loading gun. This was the first time I had ever 
climbed that hill and I was very interested to see the caves, 
hollowed out by wind, in the sandstone cliffs overhanging the 
road. In a gale I imagine these caves must produce some very 
weird sounds, for they are of different sizes and, while some 
are shallow, others appear to penetrate deep into the 
sandstone. 

Where the road comes out on a saddle of the hill there is a 
small area of flat ground flanked on the far side by the 
Muktesar Post Office, and a small bazaar. The post office was 
not open at that early hour, but one of the shops was and the 
shopkeeper very kindly gave me directions to the Dak 
Bungalow which, he said, was half a mile away on the northern 
face of the hill. There are two Dak Bungalows at Muktesar, one 
reserved for government officials and the other for the general 
public. I did not know this and my shopkeeper friend, mistaking 
me for a government official, possibly because of the size of my 
hat, directed me to the wrong one and the khansama in charge 
of the bungalow, and I, incurred the displeasure of the red tape 
brigade, the khansama by providing me with breakfast, and I 
by partaking of it. However, of this I was at the time happily 
ignorant, and later I made it my business to see that 
the khansama did not not suffer in any way for my mistake. 



While I was admiring the superb view of the snowy range, and 
waiting for breakfast, a party of twelve Europeans passed me 
carrying service rifles, followed a few minutes later by a 
sergeant and two men carrying targets and flags. The sergeant, 
a friendly soul, informed me that the party that had just passed 
was on its way to the rifle range, and that it was keeping 
together because of the man-eater. I learnt from the sergeant 
that the officer in charge of the Institute had received a 
telegram from the Government the previous day informing him 
that I was on my way to Muktesar. 

The sergeant expressed the hope that I would succeed in 
shooting the man-eater for, he said, conditions in the 
settlement had become very difficult. No one even in daylight, 
dared to move about alone, and after dusk everyone had to 
remain behind locked doors. Many attempts had been made to 
shoot the man-eater but it had never returned to any of the kills 
that had been sat over. 

After a very good breakfast I instructed the khansama to tell 
my men when they arrived that I had gone out to try get news 
of the man-eater, and that I did not know when I would return. 
Then, picking up my rifle, I went up to the post office to send a 
telegram to my mother to let her know I had arrived safely. 

From the flat ground in front of the post office and the bazaar 
the southern face of the Muktesar hill falls steeply away, and is 
cut up by ridges and ravines overgrown with dense brushwood, 
with a few trees scattered here and there. I was standing on 
the edge of the hill, looking down into the valley and the well- 
wooded Ramgarh hills beyond, when I was joined by the 
Postmaster and several shopkeepers. The Postmaster had dealt 
with the Government telegram of the previous day, and on 
seeing my signature on the form I had just handed in, he 
concluded I was the person referred to in the telegram and his 
friends and he had now come to offer me their help. I was very 
glad of the offer for they were in the best position to see and 
converse with everyone coming to Muktesar, and as the man- 



eater was sure to be the main topic of conversation where two 
or more were gathered together, they would be able to collect 
information that would be of great value to me. In rural India, 
the post office and the bania's shop are to village folk what 
taverns and clubs are to people of other lands, and if 
information on any particular subject is sought, the post office 
and the bania's shop are the best places to seek it. 

In a fold of the hill to our left front, and about two miles away 
and a thousand feet below us, was a patch of cultivation. This I 
was informed was Badri Sah's apple orchard. Badri, son of an 
old friend of mine, had visited me in Naini Tal some months 
previously and had offered to put me up in his guest house and 
to assist me in every way he could to shoot the man-eater. This 
offer, for the reason already given, I had not accepted. Now, 
however, as I had come to Muktesar at the request of the 
Government I decided I would call on Badri and accept his 
offer to help me, especially as I had just been informed by my 
companions that the last human kill had taken place in the 
valley below his orchard. 

Thanking all the men who were standing round me, and telling 
them I would rely on them for further information, I set off 
down the Dhari road. The day was still young and before 
calling on Badri there was time to visit some of the villages 
farther along the hill to the east. There were no milestones 
along the road, and after I had covered what I considered was 
about six miles and visited two villages, I turned back. I had 
retraced my steps for about three miles when I overtook a 
small girl having difficulties with a bullock. The girl, who was 
about eight years old, wanted the bullock to go in the direction 
of Muktesar, while the bullock wanted to go in the opposite 
direction, and when I arrived on the scene the stage had been 
reached when neither would do what the other wanted. The 
bullock was a quiet old beast, and with the girl walking in front 
holding the rope that was tied round his neck and I walking 
behind to keep him on the move he gave no further trouble. 
After we had proceeded a short distance I said: 



'We are not stealing Kalwa, are we? 1 I heard her addressing the 
black bullock by that name. 

'N-o,' she answered indignantly turning her big brown 

eyes full on me. 

'To whom does he belong? 1 I next asked. 

'To my father/ she said. 

'And where are we taking him? 1 
'To my uncle. 1 

'And why does uncle want Kalwa? 1 
'To plough his field.' 

'But Kalwa can't plough uncle's field by himself.' 

'Of course not/ she said. I was being stupid, but then you could 
not expect a sahib to know anything about bullocks and 
ploughing. 

'Has uncle only got one bullock?' I next asked. 

'Yes/ she said; 'he has only got one bullock now, but he did 
have two.' 

'Where is the other one?' I asked, thinking that it had probably 
been sold to satisfy a debt. 

'The tiger killed it yesterday,' I was told. Here was news indeed, 
and while I was digesting it we walked on in silence, the girl 
every now and then looking back at me until she plucked up 
courage to ask: 

'Have you come to shoot the tiger?' 

'Yes,' I said, 'I have come to try to shoot the tiger.' 

'Then why are you going away from the kill?' 

'Because we are taking Kalwa to uncle.' My answer appeared to 
satisfy the girl, and we plodded on. I had got some very useful 



information, but I wanted more and presently I said: 

'Don't you know that the tiger is a man-eater? 1 

'Oh, yes,' she said, 'it ate Kunthi's father and Bonshi Singh's 
mother, and lots of other people.' 

'Then why did your father send you with Kalwa? Why did he not 
come himself? 1 

'Because he has bhabari bokhar (malaria). 1 
'Have you no brothers?' 

'No. I had a brother but he died long ago.' 

'A mother?' 

'Yes, I have a mother; she is cooking the food. 1 
'A sister?' 

'No, I have no sister. 1 So on this small girl had devolved the 
dangerous task of taking her father's bullock to her uncle, 
along a road on which men were afraid to walk except when in 
large parties, and on which in four hours I had not seen 
another human being. 

We had now come to a path up which the girl went, the bullock 
following, and I bringing up the rear. Presently we came to a 
field on the far side of which was a small house. As we 
approached the house the girl called out and told her uncle 
that she had brought Kalwa. 

'All right,' a man's voice answered from the house, 'tie him to 
the post, Putli, and go home. I am having my food. 1 So we tied 
Kalwa to the post and went back to the road. Without the 
connecting link of Kalwa between us, Putli (dolly) was now shy, 
and as she would not walk by my side I walked ahead, suiting 
my pace to hers. We walked in silence for some time and then I 
said: 


'I want to shoot the tiger that killed uncle's bullock but I don't 



know where the kill is. Will you show me? 1 
'Oh, yes/ she said eagerly 'I will show you. 1 
'Have you seen the kill? 1 I asked. 

'No/ she said, 'I have not seen it, but I heard uncle telling my 
father where it was.' 

'Is it close to the road? 1 

'I don't know.' 

'Was the bullock alone when it was killed?' 

'No, it was with the village cattle.' 

'Was it killed in the morning or the evening?' 

'It was killed in the morning when it was going out to graze 
with the cows.' 

While talking to the girl I was keeping a sharp look-out all 
round, for the road was bordered on the left by heavy tree 
jungle, and on the right by dense scrub. We had proceeded for 
about a mile when we came to a well-used cattle track leading 
off into the jungle on the left. Here the girl stopped and said it 
was on this track that her uncle had told her father the bullock 
had been killed. I had now got all the particulars I needed to 
enable me to find the kill, and after seeing the girl safely to her 
home I returned to the cattle track. This track ran across a 
valley and I had gone along it for about a quarter of a mile 
when I came upon a spot where cattle had stampeded. Leaving 
the track, I now went through the jungle, parallel to and about 
fifty yards below the track. I had only gone a short distance 
when I came on a drag-mark. This drag-mark went straight 
down into the valley, and after I had followed it for a few 
hundred yards I found the bullock, from which only a small 
portion of the hindquarters had been eaten. It was lying at the 
foot of a bank about twenty feet high, and some forty feet from 
the head of a deep ravine. Between the ravine and the kill was 



a stunted tree, smothered over by a wild rose. This was the 
only tree within a reasonable distance of the kill on which I 
could sit with any hope of bagging the tiger, for there was no 
moon, and if the tiger came after dark— as I felt sure it would 
— the nearer I was to the kill the better would be my chance of 
killing the tiger. 

It was now 2 p.m. and there was just time for me to call on 
Badri and ask him for a cup of tea, of which I was in need for I 
had done a lot of walking since leaving Ramgarh at four o'clock 
that morning. The road to Badri's orchard takes off close to 
where the cattle track joins the road, and runs down a steep 
hill for a mile through dense brushwood. Badri was near his 
guest house, attending to a damaged apple tree when I arrived, 
and on hearing the reason for my visit he took me up the guest 
house which was on a little knoll overlooking the orchard. 

While we sat on the veranda waiting for the tea and something 
to eat that Badri had ordered his servant to prepare for me, I 
told him why I had come to Muktesar, and about the kill the 
young girl had enabled me to find. When I asked Badri why this 
kill had not been reported to the sportsmen at Muktesar, he 
said that owing to the repeated failures of the sportsmen to bag 
the tiger the village folk had lost confidence in them, and for 
this reason kills were no longer being reported to them. Badri 
attributed the failures to the elaborate preparations that had 
been made to sit over kills. These preparations consisted of 
clearing the ground near the kills of all abstractions in the way 
of bushes and small trees, the building of big machans, and the 
occupation of the machans by several men. Reasons enough for 
the reputation the tiger had earned of never returning to a kill. 
Badri was convinced that there was only one tiger in Muktesar 
district and that it was slightly lame in its right foreleg, but he 
did not know what had caused the lameness, nor did he know 
whether the animal was male or female. 

Sitting on the veranda with us was a big Airedale terrier. 
Presently the dog started growling, and looking in the direction 
in which the dog was facing, we saw a big langur sitting on the 



ground and holding down the branch of an apple tree, and 
eating the unripe fruit. Picking up a shotgun that was leaning 
against the railing of the veranda, Badri loaded it with No. 4 
shot and fired. The range was too great for the pellets, 
assuming any hit it, to do the langur any harm, but the shot had 
the effect of making it canter up the hill with the dog in hot 
pursuit. Frightened that the dog might come to grief, I asked 
Badri to call it back, but he said it would be all right for the dog 
was always chasing this particular animal, which he said had 
done a lot of damage to his young trees. The dog was now 
gaining on the langur, and when it got to within a few yards 
the langurwhipped round, got the dog by the ears, and bit a 
lump off the side of its head. The wound was a very severe one, 
and by the time we had finished attending to it my tea and a 
plate of hot puris (unleavened bread fried in butter) was ready 
for me. 

I had told Badri about the tree I intended sitting on, and when I 
returned to the kill he insisted on going with me accompanied 
by two men carrying materials for making a 
small machan. Badri and the two men had lived under the 
shadow of the man-eater for over a year and had no illusions 
about it, and when they saw that there were no trees near the 
kill— with the exception of the one I had selected— in which 
a machan could be built, they urged me not to sit up that night, 
on the assumption that the tiger would remove the kill and 
provide me with a more suitable place to sit up the following 
night. This was what I myself would have done if the tiger had 
not been a man-eater, but as it was I was disinclined to miss a 
chance which might not recur on the morrow, even if it entailed 
a little risk. There were bears in this forest and if one of them 
smelt the kill, any hope I had of getting a shot at the tiger 
would vanish, for Himalayan bears are no respecters of tigers 
and do not hesitate to appropriate their kills. Climbing into the 
tree, smothered as it was by the rose bush, was a difficult feat, 
and after I had made myself as comfortable as the thorn 
permitted and my rifle had been handed up to me Badri and his 



men left, promising to return early next morning. 

I was facing the hill, with the ravine behind me. I was in clear 
view of any animal coming down from above, but if the tiger 
came from below, as I expected, it would not see me until it got 
to the kill. The bullock, which was white, was lying on its right 
side with its legs towards me, and at a distance of about fifteen 
feet. I had taken my seat at 4 p.m. and an hour later 
a kakar started barking on the side of the ravine two hundred 
yards below me. The tiger was on the move, and having seen it 
the kakar was standing still and barking. For a long time it 
barked and then it started to move away, the bark growing 
fainter and fainter until the sound died away round the 
shoulder of the hill. This indicated that after coming within 
sight of the kill, the tiger had lain down. I had expected this to 
happen after having been told by Badri the reasons for the 
failures to shoot the tiger over a kill. I knew the tiger would 
now be lying somewhere nearby with his eyes and ears open, to 
make quite sure there were no human beings near the kill, 
before he approached it. Minute succeeded long minute; dusk 
came; objects on the hill in front of me became indistinct and 
then faded out. I could still see the kill as a white blur when a 
stick snapped at the head of the ravine and stealthy steps came 
towards me, and then stopped immediately below. For a minute 
or two there was dead silence, and then the tiger lay down on 
the dry leaves at the foot of the tree. 

Heavy clouds had rolled up near sunset and there was now a 
black canopy overhead blotting out the stars. When the tiger 
eventually got up and went to the kill, the night could best be 
described as pitch black. Strain my eyes as I would, I could see 
nothing of the white bullock, and still less of the tiger. On 
reaching the kill the tiger started blowing on it. In the 
Himalayas, and especially in the summer, kills attract hornets, 
most of which leave as the light fades but those that are too 
torpid to fly remain, and a tiger— possibly after bitter 
experience— blows off the hornets adhering to the exposed 
portion of the flesh before starting to feed. There was no need 



for me to hurry over my shot for, close though it was, the tiger 
would not see me, unless I attracted its attention by some 
movement or sound. I can see reasonably well on a dark night 
by the light of the stars, but there were no stars visible that 
night nor was there a flicker of lightning in the heavy clouds. 
The tiger had not moved the kill before starting to eat, so I 
knew he was lying broadside on to me, on the right-hand side 
of the kill. 

Owing to the attempts that had been made to shoot the tiger I 
had suspicion that it would not come before dark, and it had 
been my intention to take what aim I could— by the light of the 
stars— and then move the muzzle of my rifle sufficiently for my 
bullet to go a foot or two to the right of the kill. But now that 
the clouds had rendered my eyes useless, I would have to 
depend on my ears (my hearing at that time was perfect). 
Raising the rifle and resting my elbows on my knees, I took 
careful aim at the sound the tiger was making, and while 
holding the rifle steady, turned my right ear to the sound, and 
then back again. My aim was a little too high, so, lowering the 
muzzle a fraction of an inch, I again turned my head and 
listened. After I had done this a few times and satisfied myself 
that I was pointing at the sound, I moved the muzzle a little to 
the right and pressed the trigger. In two bounds the tiger was 
up the twenty-foot bank. At the top there was a small bit of flat 
ground, beyond which the hill went up steeply. I heard the tiger 
on the dry leaves as far as the flat ground, and then there was 
silence. This silence could be interpreted to mean either that 
the tiger had died on reaching the flat ground or that it was 
unwounded. Keeping the rifle to my shoulder I listened intently 
for three or four minutes, and as there was no further sound I 
lowered the rifle. This movement was greeted by a deep growl 
from the top of the bank. So the tiger was unwounded, and had 
seen me. My seat on the tree had originally been about ten feet 
up but, as I had nothing solid to sit on, the rose bush had 
sagged under my weight and I was now possibly no more than 
eight feet above ground, with my dangling feet considerably 



lower. And a little above and some twenty feet from me a tiger 
that I had every reason to believe was a man-eater was 
growling deep down in his throat. 

The near proximity of a tiger in daylight, even when it has not 
seen you, causes a disturbance in the blood stream. When the 
tiger is not an ordinary one, however, but a man-eater and the 
time is ten o'clock on a dark night, and you know the man-eater 
is watching you, the disturbance in the blood stream becomes a 
storm. I maintain that a tiger does not kill beyond its 
requirements, except under provocation. The tiger that was 
growling at me already, had a kill that would last it for two or 
three days, and there was no necessity for it to kill me. Even 
so, I had an uneasy feeling that on this occasion this particular 
tiger might prove an exception to the rule. Tigers will at times 
return to a kill after being fired at, but I knew this one would 
not do so. I also knew that in spite of my uneasy feeling I was 
perfectly safe so long as I did not lose my balance— I had 
nothing to hold on to— or go to sleep and fall off the tree. 

There was no longer any reason for me to deny myself a smoke, 
so I took out my cigarette case and as I lit a match I heard the 
tiger move away from the edge of the bank. Presently it came 
back and again growled. I had smoked three cigarettes, and the 
tiger was still with me, when it came on to rain. A few big 
drops at first and then a heavy downpour. I had put on light 
clothes when I started from Ramgarh that morning and in a 
few minutes I was wet to the skin, for there was not a leaf 
above me to diffuse the raindrops. The tiger, I knew, would 
have hurried off to shelter under a tree or on the lee of a rock 
the moment the rain started. The rain came on at 11 p.m.; at 4 
a.m. it stopped and the sky cleared. A wind now started to 
blow, to add in my discomfort, and where I had been cold 
before I was now frozen. When I get a twinge of rheumatism I 
remember that night and others like it, and am thankful that it 
is no more than a twinge. 

Badri, good friend that he was, arrived with a man carrying a 
kettle of hot tea just as the sun was rising. Relieving me of my 



rifle the two men caught me as I slid off the tree, for my legs 
were too cramped to function. Then as I lay on the ground and 
drank the tea they massaged my legs and restored circulation. 
When I was able to stand, Badri sent his man off to light a fire 
in the guest house. I had never previously used my ears to 
direct a bullet and was interested to find that I had missed the 
tiger's head by only a few inches. The elevation had been all 
right but I had not moved the muzzle of the rifle far enough to 
the right, with the result that my bullet had struck the bullock 
six inches from where the tiger was eating. 

The tea and the half-mile walk up to the road took all the 
creases out of me, and when we started down the mile-long 
track to Badri's orchard, wet clothes and an empty stomach 
were my only discomfort. The track ran over red clay which the 
rain had made very slippery. In this clay were three tracks: 
Badri's and his man's tracks going up, and the man's tracks 
going down. For fifty yards there were only these three tracks 
in the wet clay, and then, where there was a bend in the track, 
a tigress had jumped down from the bank on the right and gone 
down the track on the heels of Badri's man. The footprints of 
the man and the pug-marks of the tigress showed that both had 
been travelling at a fast pace. There was nothing that Badri 
and I could do, for the man had a twenty-minute start from us, 
and if he had not reached the safety of the orchard he would 
long have been beyond any help we could give him. With 
uneasy thoughts assailing us, we made what speed we could on 
the slippery ground and were very relieved to find, on coming 
to a footpath from where the orchard and a number of men 
working in it were visible, that the tigress had gone down the 
path while the man had carried on to the orchard. Questioned 
later, the man said he did not know that he had been followed 
by the tigress. 

While drying my clothes in front of a roaring wood-fire in the 
guest house, I questioned Badri about the jungle into which the 
tigress had gone. The path which the tigress had taken, Badri 
told me, ran down into a deep and densely wooded ravine 



which extended down the face of a very steep hill, for a mile or 
more, to where it was met by another ravine coming down from 
the right. At the junction of the two ravines there was a stream 
and here there was an open patch of ground which, Badri said, 
commanded the exit of both ravines. Badri was of the opinion 
that the tigress would lie up for the day in the ravine into which 
we had every reason to believe she had gone, and as this 
appeared to be an ideal place for a beat, we decided to try this 
method of getting a shot at the tigress, provided we could 
muster sufficient men to carry out the beat. Govind Singh, 
Badri's head gardener, was summoned and our plan explained 
to him. Given until midday, Govind Singh said he could muster 
a gang of thirty men to do the beat, and in addition carry out 
his master's orders to gather five maunds (four hundred and 
ten pounds) of peas. Badri had an extensive vegetable garden 
in addition to his apple orchard and the previous evening he 
had received a telegram informing him that the price of 
marrowfat peas on the Naini Tal market had jumped to four 
annas (four pence) a pound. Badri was anxious to take 
advantage of this good price and his men were gathering the 
peas to be dispatched by pack pony that night, to arrive in 
Naini Tal for the early morning market. 

After cleaning my rifle and walking round the orchard, I joined 
Badri at his morning meal— which had been put forward an 
hour to suit me— and at midday Govind produced his gang of 
thirty men. It was essential for someone to supervise the pea- 
pickers, so Badri decided to remain and send Govind to carry 
out the beat. Govind and the thirty men were local residents 
and knew the danger to be apprehended from the man-eater. 
However, after I had told them what I wanted them to do, they 
expressed their willingness to carry out my instructions. Badri 
was to give me an hour's start to enable me to search the 
ravine for the tigress and, if I failed to get a shot, to take up my 
position on the open ground near the stream. Govind was to 
divide his men into two parties, take charge of one party 
himself, and put a reliable man in charge of the other. At the 



end of the hour Badri was to fire a shot and the two parties 
were to set off, one on either side of the ravine, rolling rocks 
down, and shouting and clapping their hands. It all sounded as 
simple as that, but I had my doubts, for I have seen many beats 
go wrong. 

Going up the track down which I had come that morning, I 
followed the path that the tigress had taken, only to find after I 
had gone a short distance that it petered out in a vast expanse 
of dense brushwood. Forcing my way through for several 
hundred yards I found that the hillside was cut up by a series of 
deep ravines and ridges. Going down a ridge which I thought 
was the right-hand boundary of the ravine to be beaten, I came 
to a big drop at the bottom of which the ravine on my left met a 
ravine coming down from the right, and at the junction of the 
two ravines there was a stream. While I was looking down and 
wondering where the open ground was on which I was to take 
my stand, I heard flies buzzing near me and on following the 
sound found the remains of a cow that had been killed about a 
week before. The marks on the animal's throat showed that it 
had been killed by a tiger. The tiger had eaten all of the cow, 
except a portion of the shoulders, and the neck and head. 
Without having any particular reason for doing so, I dragged 
the carcass to the edge and sent it crashing down the steep 
hill. After rolling for about a hundred yards the carcass fetched 
up in a little hollow a short distance from the stream. Working 
round to the left I found an open patch of ground on a ridge 
about three hundred yards from the hollow into which I had 
rolled the remains of the cow. The ground down here was very 
different from what I had pictured it to be. There was no place 
where I could stand to overlook the hillside that was to be 
beaten, and the tigress might break out anywhere without my 
seeing her. However, it was then too late to do anything, for 
Badri had fired the shot that was to let me know the beat had 
started. Presently, away in the distance, I heard men shouting. 
For a time I thought the beat was coming my way and then the 
sounds grew fainter and fainter until they eventually died away. 



An hour later I again heard the beaters. They were coming 
down the hill to my right, and when they were on a level with 
me I shouted to them to stop the beat and join me on the ridge. 
It was no one's fault that the beat had miscarried, for without 
knowing the ground and without previous preparation we had 
tried to beat with a handful of untrained men a vast area of 
dense brushwood that hundreds of trained men would have 
found difficult to cope with. 

The beaters had had a very strenuous time forcing their way 
through the brushwood, and while they sat in a bunch 
removing thorns from their hands and feet and smoking my 
cigarettes, Govind and I stood facing each other, discussing his 
suggestion of carrying out a beat on the morrow in which every 
available man in Muktesar and the surrounding villages would 
take part. Suddenly, in the middle of a sentence, Govind 
stopped talking. I could see that something unusual had 
attracted his attention behind me, for his eyes narrowed and a 
look of incredulity came over his face. Swinging round I looked 
in the direction in which he was facing, and there, quietly 
walking along a field that had gone out of cultivation, was the 
tigress. She was about four hundred yards away on the hill on 
the far side of the stream, and was coming towards us. 

When a tiger is approaching you in the forest— even when you 
are far from human habitations— thoughts course through your 
mind of the many things that can go wrong to spoil your chance 
of getting the shot, or the photograph, you are hoping for. On 
one occasion I was sitting on a hillside overlooking a game 
track, waiting for a tiger. The track led to a very sacred jungle 
shrine known as Baram ka Than. Baram is a jungle God who 
protects human beings and does not permit the shooting of 
animals in the area he watches over. The forest in the heart of 
which this shrine is situated is well stocked with game and is a 
favourite hunting ground of poachers for miles around, and of 
sportsmen from all parts of India. Yet, in a lifetime's 
acquaintance with that forest, I do not know of a single 
instance of an animal having been shot in the vicinity of the 



shrine. When therefore I set out that day to shoot a tiger that 
had been taking toll of our village buffaloes, I selected a spot a 
mile from Baram's shrine. I was in position, behind a bush, at 4 
p.m. and an hour later a sambhar belled in the direction from 
which I was expecting the tiger. A little later and a little nearer 
to me a kakar started barking; the tiger was coming along the 
track near which I was sitting. The jungle was fairly open and 
consisted mostly of young jamun trees, two to three feet in 
girth. I caught sight of the tiger— a big male— when he was 
two hundred yards away. He was coming slowly and had 
reduced the distance between us to a hundred yards when I 
heard the swish of leaves, and on looking up saw that one of 
the jamun trees whose branches were interlaced with another 
was beginning to lean over. Very slowly the tree heeled over 
until it came in contact with another tree of the same species 
and of about the same size. For a few moments the second tree 
supported the weight of the first and then it, too, started to 
keel over. When the two trees were at an angle of about thirty 
degrees from the perpendicular, they fetched up against a third 
and smaller tree. For a moment or two there was a pause, and 
then all three trees crashed to the ground. While watching the 
trees, which were only a few yards from me, I had kept an eye 
on the tiger. At the first sound of the leaves he had come to a 
halt and when the trees crashed to the ground he turned and, 
without showing any sign of alarm, went back in the direction 
from which he had come. What made the occurrence I had 
witnessed so unusual was that the trees were young and 
vigorous; that no rain had fallen recently to loosen their roots; 
that not a breath of air was stirring in the forest; and, finally, 
that the trees had fallen across the track leading to the shrine 
when the tiger had only another seventy yards to cover to give 
me the shot I was waiting for. 

The chances of a shot being spoilt are greatly increased when 
the quarry is in an inhabited area in which parties of men may 
be travelling from one village to another or going to or from 
markets, or where shots may be fired to scare 



away langurs from apple orchards. The tigress still had three 
hundred yards to go to reach the stream, and two hundred 
yards of that was over open ground on which there was not a 
single tree or bush. The tigress was coming towards us at a 
slight angle and would see any movement we made, so there 
was nothing I could do but watch her, and no tigress had ever 
moved more slowly. She was known to the people of Muktesar 
as the lame tiger, but I could see no sign of her being lame. The 
plan that was forming in my head as I watched her was to wait 
until she entered the scrub jungle, and then run forward and 
try to get a shot at her either before or after she crossed the 
stream. Had there been sufficient cover between me and the 
point the tigress was making for, I would have gone forward as 
soon as I saw her and tried either to get a shot at her on the 
open ground or, failing that, to intercept her at the stream. But 
unfortunately there was not sufficient cover to mask my 
movements, so I had to wait until the tigress entered the 
bushes between the open ground and the stream. Telling the 
men not to move or make a sound until I returned, I set off at a 
run as the tigress disappeared from view. The hill was steep 
and as I ran along the contour I came to a wild rose bush which 
extended up and down the hill for many yards. Through the 
middle of the bush there was a low tunnel, and as I bent down 
to run through it my hat was knocked off, and raising my head 
too soon at the end of the tunnel I was nearly dragged off my 
feet by the thorns that entered my head. The thorns of these 
wild roses are curved and very strong and as I was not able to 
stop myself some embedded themselves and broke off in my 
head— where my sister Maggie had difficulty in removing them 
when I got home— while others tore through the flesh. With 
little trickles of blood running down my face I continued to run 
until I approached the hollow into which I had rolled the partly 
eaten kill from the hill above. This hollow was about forty yards 
long and thirty yards wide. The upper end of it where the kill 
was lying, the hill above the kill, and the further bank, were 
overgrown with dense brushwood. The lower half of the hollow 
and the bank on my side were free of bushes. As I reached the 



edge of the hollow and peered over, I heard a bone crack. The 
tigress had reached the hollow before me and, on finding the 
old kill, was trying to make up for the meal she had been 
deprived of the previous night. 

If after leaving the kill, on which there was very little flesh, the 
tigress came out on to the open ground I would get a shot at 
her, but if she went up the hill or up the far bank I would not 
see her. From the dense brushwood in which I could hear the 
tigress, a narrow path ran up the bank on my side and paused 
within a yard to my left; a yard beyond the path, there was 
a sheer drop of fifty feet into the stream below. I was 
considering the possibility of driving the tigress out of the 
brushwood on to the open ground by throwing a stone on to the 
hill above her, when I heard a sound behind me. On looking 
round I saw Govind standing behind me with my hat in his 
hand. At that time no European in India went about without a 
hat, and having seen mine knocked off by the rose bush Govind 
had retrieved it and brought it to me. Near us there was a hole 
in the hill. Putting my finger to my lips I got Govind by the arm 
and pressed him into the hole. Sitting on his hunkers with his 
chin resting on his drawn-up knees, hugging my hat, he just 
fitted into the hole and looked a very miserable object, for he 
could hear the tigress crunching bones a few yards away. As I 
straightened up and resumed my position on the edge of the 
bank, the tigress stopped eating. She had either seen me 
or, what was more probable, she had not found the old kill to 
her liking. For a long minute there was no movement or sound, 
and then I caught sight of her. She had climbed up the opposite 
bank, and was now going along the top of it towards the hill. At 
this point there were a number of six-inch-thick poplar 
saplings, and I could only see the outline of the tigress as she 
went through them. With the forlorn hope that my bullet would 
miss the saplings and find the tigress I threw up my rifle and 
took a hurried shot. At my shot the tigress whipped round, 
came down the bank, across the hollow, and up the path on my 
side, as hard as she could go. I did not know, at the time, that 



my bullet had struck a sapling near her head, and that she was 
blind of one eye. So what looked like a very determined charge 
might only have been a frightened animal running away from 
danger, for in that restricted space she would not have known 
from which direction the report of my rifle had come. Be that 
as it may, what I took to be a wounded and a very angry tigress 
was coming straight at me; so, waiting until she was two yards 
away, I leant forward and with great good luck managed to put 
the remaining bullet in the rifle into the hollow where her neck 
joined her shoulder. The impact of the heavy -500 bullet 
deflected her just sufficiently for her to miss my left shoulder, 
and her impetus carried her over the fifty-foot drop into the 
stream below, where she landed with a great splash. Taking a 
step forward I looked over the edge and saw the tigress lying 
submerged in a pool with her feet in the air, while the water in 
the pool reddened with her blood. 

Govind was still sitting in the hole, and at a sign he joined me. 
On seeing the tigress he turned and shouted to the men on the 
ridge, 'The tiger is dead. The tiger is dead.' The thirty men on 
the ridge now started shouting, and Badri on hearing them got 
hold of his shot gun and fired off ten rounds. These shots were 
heard at Muktesar and in the surrounding villages, and 
presently men from all sides were converging on the stream. 
Willing hands drew the tigress from the pool, lashed her to a 
sapling, and carried her in triumph to Badri's orchard. Here 
she was put down on a bed of straw for all to see, while I went 
to the guest house for a cup of tea. An hour later by the light of 
hand lanterns, and with a great crowd of men standing round, 
among whom were several sportsmen from Muktesar, I skinned 
the tigress. It was then that I found she was blind of one eye 
and that she had some fifty porcupine quills, varying in length 
from one to nine inches, embedded in the arm and under the 
pad of her right foreleg. By ten o'clock my job was finished, and 
declining Badri's very kind invitation to spend the night with 
him I climbed the hill in company with the people who had 
come down from Muktesar, among whom were my two men 



carrying the skin. On the open ground in front of the post office 
the skin was spread out for the Postmaster and his friends to 
see. At midnight I lay down in the Dak Bungalow reserved for 
the public, for a few hours' sleep. Four hours later I was on the 
move again and at midday I was back in my home at Naini Tal 
after an absence of seventy-two hours. 

The shooting of a man-eater gives one a feeling of satisfaction. 
Satisfaction at having done a job that badly needed doing. 
Satisfaction at having outmanoeuvred, on his own ground, a 
very worthy antagonist. And, the greatest satisfaction of all, at 
having made a small portion of the earth safe for a brave little 
girl to walk on. 



The Panar Man-Eater 


1 

WHILE I WAS HUNTING the Champawat man-eater in 1907, I 
heard of a man-eating leopard that was terrorizing the 
inhabitants of villages on the eastern border of Almora district. 
This leopard, about which questions were asked in the House 
of Commons, was known under several names and was credited 
with having killed four hundred human beings. I knew the 
animal under the name of the Panar man-eater, and I shall 
therefore use this name for the purpose of my story. 

No mention is made in government records of man-eaters prior 
to the year 1905 and it would appear that until the advent of 
the Champawat tiger and the Panar leopard, man-eaters were 
unknown in Kumaon. When therefore these two animals— who 
between them killed eight hundred and thirty-six human beings 
— made their appearance, the Government was faced with a 
difficult situation for it had no machinery to put in action 
against them and had to rely on personal appeals to sportsmen. 
Unfortunately there were very few sportsmen in Kumaon at 
that time who had any inclination for this new form of sport 
which, rightly or wrongly was considered as hazardous as 
Wilson's solo attempt— made a few years later— to conquer 
Everest. I myself was as ignorant of man-eaters as Wilson was 
of Everest and that I succeeded in my attempt, where he 
apparently failed in his, was due entirely to luck. 

When I returned to my home in Naini Tal after killing the 
Champawat tiger I was asked by the Government to undertake 
the shooting of the Panar leopard. I was working hard for a 
living at the time and several weeks elapsed before I was able 
to spare the time to undertake this task, and then just as I was 
ready to start for the outlying area of Almora district in which 
the leopard was operating, I received an urgent request from 
Berthoud, the Deputy Commissioner of Naini Tal, to go to the 
help of the people of Muktesar where a man-eating tiger had 
established a reign of terror. After hunting down the tiger, an 



account of which I have given, I went in pursuit of the Panar 
leopard. 

As I had not previously visited the vast area over which this 
leopard was operating, I went via Almora to learn all I could 
about the leopard from Stiffe, the Deputy Commissioner of 
Almora. He kindly invited me to lunch, provided me with maps, 
and then gave me a bit of a jolt when wishing me goodbye by 
asking me if I had considered all the risks and prepared for 
them by making my will. 

My maps showed that there were two approaches to the 
affected area, one via Panwanaula on the Pithoragarh road, and 
the other via Lamgara on the Dabidhura road. I selected the 
latter route and after lunch set out in good heart— despite the 
reference to a will— accompanied by one servant and four men 
carrying my luggage. My men and I had already done a still 
march of fourteen miles from Khairna, but being young and fit 
were prepared to do another long march before calling it a day. 

As the full moon was rising we arrived at a small isolated 
building which, from the scribbling on the walls and the torn 
bits of paper lying about, we assumed was used as a school. I 
had no tent with me and as the door of the building was locked 
I decided to spend the night in the courtyard with my men, a 
perfectly safe proceeding for we were still many miles from the 
man-eater's hunting grounds. This courtyard, which was about 
twenty feet square, abutted on the public road and was 
surrounded on three sides by a two-foot-high wall. On the 
fourth side it was bounded by the school building. 

There was plenty of fuel in the jungle behind the school and my 
men soon had a fire burning in a corner of the courtyard for my 
servant to cook my dinner. I was sitting with my back to the 
locked door, smoking, and my servant had just laid a leg of 
mutton on the low wall nearest the road and turned to attend 
to the fire, when I saw the head of a leopard appear over the 
wall close to the leg of mutton. Fascinated, I sat motionless and 
watched— for the leopard was facing me— and when the man 



had moved away a few feet the leopard grabbed the meat and 
bounded across the road into the jungle beyond. The meat had 
been put down on a big sheet of paper, which had stuck to it, 
and when my servant heard the rustle of paper and saw what 
he thought was a dog running away with it he dashed forward 
shouting, but on realizing that he was dealing with a leopard 
and not with a mere dog he changed direction and dashed 
towards me with even greater speed. All white people in the 
East are credited with being a little mad— for other reasons 
than walking about in the midday sun— and I am afraid my 
good servant thought I was a little more mad than most of my 
kind when he found I was laughing, for he said in a very 
aggrieved voice, 'It was your dinner that the leopard carried 
away and I have nothing else for you to eat. 1 However, he duly 
produced a meal that did him credit, and to which I did as 
much justice as I am sure the hungry leopard did to his leg of 
prime mutton. 

Making an early start next morning, we halted at Lamgara for a 
meal, and by evening reached the Dol Dak Bungalow on the 
border of the man-eater's domain. Leaving my men at the 
bungalow I set out the following morning to try to get news of 
the man-eater. Going from village to village, and examining the 
connecting footpaths for leopard pug-marks, I arrived in the 
late evening at an isolated homestead consisting of a single 
stone-built slate-roofed house, situated in a few acres of 
cultivated land and surrounded by scrub jungle. On the 
footpath leading to this homestead I found the pug-marks of a 
big male leopard. 

As I approached the house a man appeared on the narrow 
balcony and, climbing down a few wooden steps, came across 
the courtyard to meet me. He was a young man, possibly 
twenty-two years of age, and in great distress. It appeared that 
the previous night while he and his wife were sleeping on the 
floor of the single room that comprised the house, with the 
door open for it was April and very hot, the man-eater climbed 
on to the balcony and getting a grip of his wife's throat started 



to pull her head-foremost out of the room. With a strangled 
scream the woman flung an arm round her husband who, 
realizing in a flash what was happening, seized her arm with 
one hand and placing the other against the lintel of the door, 
for leverage, jerked her away from the leopard and closed the 
door. For the rest of the night the man and his wife cowered in 
a corner of the room, while the leopard tried to tear down the 
door. In the hot unventilated room the woman's wounds started 
to turn septic and by morning her suffering and fear had 
rendered her unconscious. 

Throughout the day the man remained with his wife, too 
frightened to leave her for fear the leopard should return and 
carry her away, and too frightened to face the mile of scrub 
jungle that lay between him and his nearest neighbour. As day 
was closing down and the unfortunate man was facing another 
night of terror he saw me coming towards the house, and when 
I had heard his story I was no longer surprised that he had run 
towards me and thrown himself sobbing at my feet. 

A difficult situation faced me. I had not up to that time 
approached Government to provide people living in areas in 
which a man-eater was operating with first-aid sets, so there 
was no medical or any other kind of aid nearer than Almora, 
and Almora was twenty-five miles away. To get help for the 
woman I would have to go for it myself and that would mean 
condemning the man to lunacy, for he had already stood as 
much as any man could stand and another night in that room, 
with the prospect of the leopard returning and trying to gain 
entrance, would of a certainty have landed him in a mad-house. 

The man's wife, a girl of about eighteen, was lying on her back 
when the leopard clamped its teeth into her throat, and when 
the man got a grip of her arm and started to pull her back, the 
leopard— to get a better purchase— drove the claws of one 
paw into her breast. In the final struggle the claws ripped 
through the flesh, making four deep cuts. In the heat of the 
small room, which had only one door and no windows and in 



which a swarm of flies were buzzing, all the wounds in the 
girl's throat and on her breast had turned septic, and whether 
medical aid could be procured or not, the chances of her 
surviving were very slight; so, instead of going for help, I 
decided to stay the night with the man. I very sincerely hope 
that no one who reads this story will ever be condemned to 
seeing and hearing the sufferings of a human being, or of an 
animal, that has had the misfortune of being caught by the 
throat by either a leopard or a tiger and not having the means 
— other than a bullet— of alleviating or of ending the suffering. 

The balcony which ran the length of the house, and which was 
boarded up at both ends, was about fifteen feet long and four 
feet wide, accessible by steps hewn in a pine sapling. Opposite, 
these steps was the one door of the house, and under the 
balcony was an open recess four feet wide and four feet high, 
used for storing firewood. 

The man begged me to stay in the room with him and his wife 
but it was not possible for me to do this, for, though I am not 
squeamish, the smell in the room was overpowering and more 
than I could stand. So between us we moved the firewood from 
one end of the recess under the balcony, clearing a small space 
where I could sit with my back to the wall. Night was now 
closing in, so after a wash and a drink at a near-by spring I 
settled down in my corner and told the man to go up to his wife 
and keep the door of the room open. As he climbed the steps 
the man said. The leopard will surely kill you. Sahib, and then 
what will I do?' 'Close the door,' I answered, 'and wait for the 
morning.' 

The moon was two nights off the full and there would be a 
short period of darkness. It was this period of darkness that 
was worrying me. If the leopard had remained scratching at 
the door until daylight, as the man said it had, it would not 
have gone far and even now it might be lurking in the bushes 
watching me. I had been in position for half an hour, straining 
my eyes into the darkening night and praying for the moon to 



top the hills to the east, when a jackal gave its alarm call. This 
call, which is given with the full force of the animal's lungs, can 
be heard for a very long distance and can be described as 
'pheaon, pheaon', repeated over and over again as long as the 
danger that has alarmed the jackal is in sight. Leopards when 
hunting or when approaching a kill move very slowly, and it 
would be many minutes before this one— assuming it was the 
man-eater— covered the half mile between us, and even if in 
the meantime the moon had not risen it would be giving 
sufficient light to shoot by, so I was able to relax and breathe 
more freely. 

Minutes dragged by. The jackal stopped calling. The moon rose 
over the hills, flooding the ground in front of me with brilliant 
light. No movement to be seen anywhere, and the only sound to 
be heard in all the world was the agonized fight for breath of 
the unfortunate girl above me. Minutes gave way to hours. The 
moon climbed the heavens and then started to go down in the 
west, casting the shadow of the house on the ground I was 
watching. Another period of danger, for if the leopard had seen 
me he would, with a leopard's patience, be waiting for these 
lengthening shadows to mask his movements. Nothing 
happened, and one of the longest nights I have ever watched 
through came to an end when the light from the sun lit up the 
sky where, twelve hours earlier, the moon had risen. 

The man, after his vigil of the previous night, had slept soundly 
and as I left my corner and eased my aching bones— only those 
who have sat motionless on hard ground for hours know how 
bones can ache— he came down the steps. Except for a few 
wild raspberries I had eaten nothing for twenty-four hours, and 
as no useful purpose would have been served by my remaining 
any longer, I bade the man goodbye and set off to rejoin my 
men at the Dol Dak Bungalow, eight miles away, and summon 
aid for the girl. I had only gone a few miles when I met my 
men. Alarmed at my long absence they had packed up my 
belongings, paid my dues at the Dak Bungalow, and then set 
out to look for me. While I was talking to them the Road 



Overseer, whom I have mentioned in my story of the Temple 
tiger, came along. He was well mounted on a sturdy Bhootia 
pony, and as he was on his way to Almora he gladly undertook 
to carry a letter from me to Stiffe. Immediately on receipt of my 
letter Stiffe dispatched medical aid for the girl, but her 
sufferings were over when it arrived. 

It was this Road Overseer who informed me about the human 
kill that took me to Dabidhura, where I met with one of the 
most interesting and the most exciting shikar experiences I 
have ever had. After that experience I asked the old priest of 
the Dabidhura temple if the man-eater had as effective 
protection from his temple as the tiger I had failed to shoot, 
and he answered, 'No, no. Sahib. This Shaitan (devil) has killed 
many people who worshipped at my temple and when you come 
back to shoot him, as you say you will, I shall offer prayers for 
your success morning and evening. 1 

2 

No matter how full of happiness our life may have been, there 
are periods in it that we look back to with special pleasure. 

Such a period for me was the year 1910, for in that year I shot 
the Muktesar man-eating tiger and the Panar man-eating 
leopard, and in between these two— for me— great events, my 
men and I set up an all-time record at Mokameh Ghat by 
handling, without any mechanical means, five thousand five 
hundred tonnes of goods in a single working day. 

My first attempt to shoot the Panar leopard was made in April 
1910, and it was not until September of the same year that I 
was able to spare the time to make a second attempt. I have no 
idea how many human beings were killed by the leopard 
between April and September, for no bulletins were issued by 
Government and beyond a reference to questions asked in the 
House of Commons no mention of the leopard— as far as I am 
aware— was made in the Indian press. The Panar leopard was 
credited with having killed four hundred human beings, against 
one hundred and twenty-five killed by the Rudraprayag 


leopard, and the fact that the former received such scant 
publicity while the latter was headline news throughout India 
was due entirely to the fact that the Panar leopard operated in 
a remote area far from the beaten track, whereas the 
Rudraprayag leopard operated in an area visited each year by 
sixty thousand pilgrims ranging from the humblest in the land 
to the highest, all of whom had to run the gauntlet of the man- 
eater. It was these pilgrims, and the daily bulletins issued by 
the Government, that made the Rudraprayag leopard so 
famous, though it caused far less human suffering than the 
Panar leopard. 

Accompanied by a servant and four men carrying my camp kit 
and provisions, I set out from Naini Tal on 10 September on my 
second attempt to shoot the Panar leopard. The sky was 
overcast when we left home at 4 a.m. and we had only gone a 
few miles when a deluge of rain came on. Throughout the day it 
rained and we arrived at Almora, after a twenty-eight-mile 
march, wet to the bone. I was to have spent the night with 
Stiffe, but not having a stitch of dry clothing to put on I 
excused myself and spent the night at the Dak Bungalow. There 
were no other travellers there and the man in charge very 
kindly put two rooms at my disposal, with a big wood fire in 
each, and by morning my kit was dry enough for me to 
continue my journey. 

It had been my intention to follow the same route from Almora 
that I had followed in April, and start my hunt for the leopard 
from the house in which the girl had died of her wounds. While 
I was having breakfast a mason by the name of Panwa, who did 
odd jobs for us in Naini Tal, presented himself. Panwa's home 
was in the Panar valley, and on learning from my men that I 
was on my way to try to shoot the man-eater he asked for 
permission to join our party, for he wanted to visit his home 
and was frightened to undertake the journey alone. Panwa 
knew the country and on his advice I altered my plans and 
instead of taking the road to Dabidhura via the school where 
the leopard had eaten my dinner, I took the road leading to 



Pithoragarh. Spending the night at the Panwa Naula Dak 
Bungalow, we made an early start next morning and after 
proceeding a few miles left the Pithoragarh road for a track 
leading off to the right. We were now in the man-eater's 
territory where there were no roads, and where the only 
communication was along footpaths running from village to 
village. 

Progress was slow, for the villages were widely scattered over 
many hundreds of square miles of country, and as the exact 
whereabouts of the man-eater were not known it was necessary 
to visit each village to make inquiries. Going through Salan and 
Rangot pattis (patti is a group of villages), I arrived late on the 
evening of the fourth day at Chakati, where I was informed by 
the headman that a human being had been killed a few days 
previously at a village called Sanouli on the far side of the 
Panar river. Owing to the recent heavy rain the Panar was in 
flood and the headman advised me to spend the night in his 
village, promising to give me a guide next morning to show me 
the only safe ford over the river, for the Panar was not bridged. 

The headman and I had carried on our conversation at one end 
of a long row of double-storied buildings and when, on his 
advice, I elected to stay the night in the village, he said he 
would have two rooms vacated in the upper storey for myself 
and my men. I had noticed while talking to him that the end 
room on the ground floor was untenanted, so I told him I would 
stay in it and that he need only have one room vacated in the 
upper storey for my men. The room I had elected to spend the 
night in had no door, but this did not matter for I had been told 
that the last kill had taken place on the far side of the river and 
I knew the man-eater would not attempt to cross the river 
while it was in flood. 

The room had no furniture of any kind, and after my men had 
swept all the straw and bits of rags out of it, complaining as 
they did so that the last tenant must have been a very dirty 
person, they spread my groundsheet on the mud floor and 



made up my bed. I ate my dinner— which my servant cooked 
on an open fire in the courtyard— sitting on my bed, and as I 
had done a lot of walking during the twelve hours I had been 
on my feet, it did not take me long to get to sleep. The sun was 
just rising next morning, flooding the room with light, when on 
hearing a slight sound in the room I opened my eyes and saw a 
man sitting on the floor near my bed. He was about fifty years 
of age, and in the last stage of leprosy. On seeing that I was 
awake this unfortunate living death said he hoped I had spent a 
comfortable night in his room. He went on to say that he had 
been on a two-days' visit to friends in an adjoining village, and 
finding me asleep in his room on his return had sat near my 
bed and waited for me to awake. 

Leprosy, the most terrible and the most contagious of all 
diseases in the East, is very prevalent throughout Kumaon, and 
especially bad in Almora district. Being fatalists the people look 
upon the disease as a visitation from God, and neither 
segregate the afflicted nor take any precautions against 
infection. So quite evidently, the headman did not think it 
necessary to warn me that the room I had selected to stay in 
had for years been the home of a leper. It did not take me long 
to dress that morning, and as soon as our guide was ready we 
left the village. 

Moving about as I have done in Kumaon I have always gone in 
dread of leprosy, and I have never felt as unclean as I did after 
my night in that poor unfortunate's room. At the first stream 
we came to I called a halt, for my servant to get breakfast 
ready for me and for my men to have their food. Then, telling 
my men to wash my groundsheet and lay my bedding out in the 
sun, I took a bar of carbolic soap and went down the stream to 
where there was a little pool surrounded by great slabs of rock. 
Taking off every stitch of clothing I had worn in that room, I 
washed it all in the pool and, after laying it out on the slabs of 
rock, I used the remainder of the soap to scrub myself as I had 
never scrubbed myself before. Two hours later, in garments 
that had shrunk a little from the rough treatment they had 



received, I returned to my men feeling clean once again, and 
with a hunter's appetite for breakfast. 

Our guide was a man about four feet six inches tall with a big 
head crowned with a mop of long hair; a great barrel of a body, 
short legs, and few words. When I asked him if we had any stiff 
climbing to do, he stretched out his open hand, and answered, 
'Flat as that.' Having said this he led us down a very steep hill 
into a deep valley. Here I expected him to turn and follow the 
valley down to its junction with the river. But no. Without 
saying a word or even turning his head he crossed the open 
ground and went straight up the hill on the far side. This hill, in 
addition to being very steep and overgrown with thorn bushes, 
had loose gravel on it which made the going difficult, and as 
the sun was now overhead and very hot, we reached the top in 
a bath of sweat. Our guide, whose legs appeared to have been 
made for climbing hills, had not turned a hair. 

There was an extensive view from the top of the hill, and when 
our guide informed us that we still had the two high hills in the 
foreground to climb before reaching the Panar river, Panwa, 
the mason, who was carrying a bundle containing presents for 
his family and a great coat made of heavy dark material, 
handed the coat to the guide and said that as he was making us 
climb all the hills in Kumaon he could carry the coat for the 
rest of the way. Unwinding a length of goat hair cord from 
round his body the guide folded up the coat and strapped it 
securely to his back. Down and up we went, and down and up 
again, and then away down in a deep valley we saw the river. 

So far we had been going over trackless ground, without a 
village in sight, but we now came on a narrow path running 
straight down to the river. The nearer we got to the river the 
less I liked the look of it. The path leading to the water and up 
the far side showed that there was a ford here, but the river 
was in flood and the crossing appeared to me to be a very 
hazardous one. The guide assured us, however, that it was 
perfectly safe to cross, so removing my shoes and stockings I 
linked arms with Panwa and stepped into the water. The river 



was about forty yards wide and from its broken surface I 
judged it was running over a very rough bed. In this I was 
right, and after stubbing my toes a few times and narrowly 
avoiding being washed off our feet, we struggled out on the far 
bank. 

Our guide had followed us into the river and on looking back, I 
saw that the little man was in difficulties. The water which for 
us had been thigh deep was for him waist deep and on reaching 
the main stream, instead of bracing his back against it and 
walking crab fashion, he very foolishly faced up-stream with 
the result that he was swept over backwards and submerged 
under the fast-running current. I was barefoot and helpless on 
the sharp stones, but Panwa— to whom sharp stones were no 
obstacle— threw down the bundle he was carrying and without 
a moment's hesitation sprinted along the bank to where fifty 
yards farther down, a big slab of rock jutted into the river at 
the head of a terrifying rapid. Running out on to this wet and 
slippery rock Panwa lay down, and as the drowning man was 
swept past, grabbed him by his long hair and after a desperate 
struggle drew him on to the rock. When the two men rejoined 
me— the guide looking like a drowned rat— I complimented 
Panwa on his noble and brave act in having saved the little 
man's life, at great risk to his own. After looking at me in some 
surprise Panwa said, 'Oh, it was not his life that I wanted to 
save, but my new coat that was strapped to his back.' Anyway, 
whatever the motive, a tragedy had been averted, and after my 
men had linked arms and crossed safely I decided to call it a 
day and spend the night on the river bank. Panwa, whose 
village was five miles farther up the river, now left me, taking 
with him the guide, who was frightened to attempt a second 
crossing of the river. 

3 

Next morning we set out to find Sanouli, where the last human 
kill had taken place. Late in the evening of that day we found 
ourselves in a wide open valley, and as there were no human 
habitations in sight, we decided to spend the night on the open 


ground. We were now in the heart of the man-eater's country 
and after a very unrestful night, spent on cold wet ground, 
arrived about midday at Sanouli. The inhabitants of this small 
village were overjoyed to see us and they very gladly put a 
room at the disposal of my men, and gave me the use of an 
open platform with a thatched roof. 

The village was built on the side of a hill overlooking a valley in 
which there were terraced fields, from which a paddy crop had 
recently been harvested. The hill on the far side of the valley 
sloped up gradually, and a hundred yards from the cultivated 
land there was a dense patch of brushwood, some twenty acres 
in extent. On the brow of the hill, above this patch of 
brushwood, there was a village, and on the shoulder of the hill 
to the right another village. To the left of the terraced fields the 
valley was closed in by a steep grassy hill. So, in effect, the 
patch of brushwood was surrounded on three sides by 
cultivated land, and on the fourth by open grass land. 

While breakfast was being got ready, the men of the village sat 
round me and talked. During the second half of March and the 
first half of April, four human beings had been killed in this 
area by the man-eater. The first kill had taken place in the 
village on the shoulder of the hill, the second and third in the 
village on the brow of the hill, and the fourth in Sanouli. All 
four victims had been killed at night and carried some five 
hundred yards into the patch of brushwood, where the leopard 
had eaten them at his leisure, for— having no firearms— the 
inhabitants of the three villages were too frightened to make 
any attempt to recover the bodies. The last kill had taken place 
six days before, and my informants were convinced that the 
leopard was still in the patch of brushwood. 

I had purchased two young male goats in a village we passed 
through earlier that day, and towards evening I took the 
smaller one and tied it at the edge of the path of brushwood to 
test the villager's assertion that the leopard was still in the 
cover. I did not sit over the goat, because there were no 



suitable trees nearby and also because clouds were banking up 
and it looked as though there might be rain during the night. 
The platform that had been placed at my disposal was open all 
round, so I tied the second goat near it in the hope that if the 
leopard visited the village during the night it would prefer a 
tender goat to a tough human being. Long into the night I 
listened to the two goats calling to each other. This convinced 
me that the leopard was not within hearing distance. However, 
there was no reason why he should not return to the locality, so 
I went to sleep hoping for the best. 

There was a light shower during the night and when the sun 
rose in a cloudless sky every leaf and blade of grass was 
sparkling with raindrops and every bird that had a song to sing 
was singing a joyful welcome to the day. The goat near my 
platform was contentedly browsing off a bush and bleating 
occasionally; while the one across the valley was silent. Telling 
my servant to keep my breakfast warm, I crossed the valley and 
went to the spot where I had tied up the smaller goat. Here I 
found that, some time before the rain came on, a leopard had 
killed the goat, broken the rope, and carried away the kill. The 
rain had washed out the drag-mark, but this did not matter for 
there was only one place to which the leopard could have taken 
his kill, and that was into the dense patch of brushwood. 

Stalking a leopard, or a tiger, on its kill is one of the most 
interesting forms of sport I know of, but it can only be indulged 
in with any hope of success when the conditions are favourable. 
Here the conditions were not favourable, for the brushwood 
was too dense to permit of a noiseless approach. Returning to 
the village, I had breakfast and then called the villagers 
together, as I wanted to consult them about the surrounding 
country. It was necessary to visit the kill to see if the leopard 
had left sufficient for me to sit over and, while doing so, I 
would not be able to avoid disturbing the leopard. What I 
wanted to learn from the villagers was whether there was any 
other heavy cover, within a reasonable distance, to which the 
leopard could retire on being disturbed by me. I was told that 



there was no such cover nearer than two miles, and that to get 
to it the leopard would have to cross a wide stretch of 
cultivated land. 

At midday I returned to the patch of brushwood and, a hundred 
yards from where he had killed it, I found all that the leopard 
had left of the goat— its hooves, horns, and part of its stomach. 
As there was no fear of the leopard leaving the cover at that 
time of day for the jungle two miles away, I tried for several 
hours to stalk it, helped by bulbuls, drongos, thrushes, and 
scimitar-babblers, all of whom kept me informed of the 
leopard's every movement. In case any should question why I 
did not collect the men of the three villages and get them to 
drive the leopard out on to the open ground, where I could 
have shot it, it is necessary to say that this could not have been 
attempted without grave danger to the beaters. As soon as the 
leopard found he was being driven towards open ground, he 
would have broken back and attacked anyone who got in his 
way. 

On my return to the village after my unsuccessful attempt to 
get a shot at the leopard, I went down with a bad attack of 
malaria and for the next twenty-four hours I lay on the platform 
in a stupor. By the evening of the following day the fever had 
left me and I was able to continue the hunt. On their own 
initiative the previous night my men had tied out the second 
goat where the first had been killed, but the leopard had not 
touched it. This was all to the good, for the leopard would now 
be hungry, and I set out on that third evening full of hope. 

On the near side of the patch of brushwood, and about a 
hundred yards from where the goat had been killed two nights 
previously there was an old oak tree. This tree was growing out 
of a six-foot-high bank between two terraced fields and was 
leaning away from the hill at an angle that made it possible for 
me to walk up the trunk in my rubber soled shoes. On the 
underside of the trunk and about fifteen feet from the ground 
there was a branch jutting out over the lower field. This 



branch, which was about a foot thick, offered a very 
uncomfortable and a very unsafe seat for it was hollow and 
rotten. However, as it was the only branch on the tree, and as 
there were no other trees within a radius of several hundred 
yards, I decided to risk the branch. 

As I had every reason to believe— from the similarity of the 
pug-marks I had found in the brushwood to those I had seen in 
April on the path leading to the homestead where the girl was 
killed— that the leopard I was dealing with was the Panar man- 
eater, I made my men cut a number of long blackthorn shoots. 
After I had taken my seat with my back to the tree and my legs 
stretched out along the branch, I made the men tie the shoots 
into bundles and lay them on the trunk of the tree and lash 
them to it securely with strong rope. To the efficient carrying 
out of these small details I am convinced I owe my life. 

Several of the blackthorn shoots, which were from ten to 
twenty feet long, projected on either side of the tree; and as I 
had nothing to hold on to, to maintain my balance, I gathered 
the shoots on either side of me and held them firmly pressed 
between my arms and my body. By five o'clock my preparations 
were complete. I was firmly seated on the branch with my coat 
collar pulled up well in front to protect my throat, and my soft 
hat pulled down well behind to protect the back of my neck. 
The goat was tied to a stake driven into the field thirty yards in 
front of me, and my men were sitting out in the field smoking 
and talking loudly. 

Up to this point all had been quiet in the patch of brushwood, 
but now, a scimitar-babbler gave its piercing alarm call 
followed a minute or two later by the chattering of several 
white-throated laughing thrushes. These two species of birds 
are the most reliable informants in the hills, and on hearing 
them I signalled to my men to return to the village. This they 
appeared to be very glad to do, and as they walked away, still 
talking loudly, the goat started bleating. Nothing happened for 
the next half-hour and then, as the sun was fading off the hill 



above the village, two drongos that had been sitting on the tree 
above me, flew off and started to bait some animal on the open 
ground between me and the patch of brushwood. The goat 
while calling had been facing in the direction of the village, and 
it now turned round, facing me, and stopped calling. By 
watching the goat I could follow the movements of the animal 
that the drongos were baiting and that the goat was interested 
in, and this animal could only be a leopard. The moon was in 
her third quarter and there would be several hours of darkness. 
In anticipation of the leopard's coming when light conditions 
were not favourable, I had armed myself with a twelve-bore 
double-barrelled shot gun loaded with slugs, for there was a 
better chance of my hitting the leopard with eight slugs than 
with a single rifle bullet. Aids to night shooting, in the way of 
electric lights and torches, were not used in India at the time I 
am writing about, and all that one had to rely on for accuracy 
of aim was a strip of white cloth tied round the muzzle of the 
weapon. 

Again nothing happened for many minutes, and then I felt a 
gentle pull on the blackthorn shoots I was holding and blessed 
my forethought in having had the shoots tied to the leaning 
tree, for I could not turn round to defend myself and at best the 
collar of my coat and my hat were poor protection. No question 
now that I was dealing with a man-eater, and a very determined 
man-eater at that. Finding that he could not climb over the 
thorns, the leopard, after his initial pull, had now got the butt 
ends of the shoots between his teeth and was jerking them 
violently, pulling me hard against the trunk of the tree. And 
now the last of the daylight faded out of the sky and the 
leopard, who did all his human killing in the dark, was in his 
element and I was out of mine, for in the dark a human being is 
the most helpless of all animals and— speaking for myself— his 
courage is at its lowest ebb. Having killed four hundred human 
beings at night, the leopard was quite unafraid of me, as was 
evident from the fact that while tugging at the shoots, he was 
growling loud enough to be heard by the men anxiously 



listening in the village. While this growling terrified the men, 
as they told me later, it had the opposite effect on me, for it let 
me know where the leopard was and what he was doing. It was 
when he was silent that I was most terrified, for I did not know 
what his next move would be. Several times he had nearly 
unseated me by pulling on the shoots vigorously and then 
suddenly letting them go, and now that it was dark and I had 
nothing stable to hold on to, I felt sure that if he sprang up he 
would only need to touch me to send me crashing to the 
ground. 

After one of these nerve-racking periods of silence the leopard 
jumped down off the high bank and dashed towards the goat. 

In the hope that the leopard would come while there was still 
sufficient light to shoot by, I had tied the goat thirty yards from 
the tree to give me time to kill the leopard before it got to the 
goat. But now, in the dark, I could not save the goat— which, 
being white, I could only just see as an indistinct blur— so I 
waited until it had stopped struggling and then aimed where I 
thought the leopard would be and pressed the trigger. My shot 
was greeted with an angry grunt and I saw a white flash as the 
leopard went over backwards, and disappeared down another 
high bank into the field beyond. 

For ten or fifteen minutes I listened anxiously for further 
sounds from the leopard, and then my men called out and 
asked if they should come to me. It was now guite safe for them 
to do so, provided they kept to the high ground. So I told them 
to light pine torches, and thereafter carry out my instructions. 
These torches, made of twelve to eighteen inches long splinters 
of resin-impregnated pine-wood cut from a living tree, give a 
brilliant light and provide the remote villages in Kumaon with 
the only illumination they have ever known. 

After a lot of shouting and running about, some twenty men 
each carrying a torch left the village and, following my 
instructions, circled round above the terraced fields and 
approached my tree from behind. The knots in the ropes 



securing the blackthorn shoots to the tree had been pulled so 
tight by the leopard that they had to be cut. After the thorns 
had been removed men climbed the tree and helped me down, 
for the uncomfortable seat had given me cramps in my legs. 

The combined light from the torches lit up the field on which 
the dead goat was lying, but the terraced field beyond was in 
shadow. When cigarettes had been handed round I told the men 
I had wounded the leopard but did not know how badly, and 
that we would return to the village now and I would look for 
the wounded animal in the morning. At this, great 
disappointment was expressed. 'If you have wounded the 
leopard it must surely be dead by now. There are many of us, 
and you have a gun, so there is no danger . 1 'At least let us go as 
far as the edge of the field and see if the leopard has left a 
blood trail.' After all arguments for and against going to look 
for the leopard immediately had been exhausted, I consented 
against my better judgement to go as far as the edge of the 
field, from where we could look down on the terraced field 
below. 

Having acceded to their request, I made the men promise that 
they would walk in line behind me, hold their torches high, and 
not run away and leave me in the dark if the leopard charged. 
This promise they very willingly gave, and after the torches had 
been replenished and were burning brightly we set off, I 
walking in front and the men following five yards behind. 

Thirty yards to the goat, and another twenty yards to the edge 
of the field. Very slowly, and in silence, we moved forward. 
When we reached the goat— no time now to look for a blood 
trail— the farther end of the lower field came into view. The 
nearer we approached the edge, the more of this field became 
visible, and then, when only a narrow strip remained in shadow 
from the torches, the leopard, with a succession of angry 
grunts, sprang up the bank and into full view. 

There is something very terrifying in the angry grunt of a 
charging leopard, and I have seen a line of elephants that were 



staunch to tiger turn and stampede from a charging leopard; so 
I was not surprised when my companions, all of whom were 
unarmed, turned as one man and bolted. Fortunately for me, in 
their anxiety to get away they collided with each other and 
some of the burning splinters of pine— held loosely in their 
hands— fell to the ground and continued to flicker, giving me 
sufficient light to put a charge of slugs into the leopard's chest. 

On hearing my shot the men stopped running, and then I heard 
one of them say, 'Oh, no. He won't be angry with us, for he 
knows that this devil has turned our courage to water.' Yes, I 
knew, from my recent experience on the tree, that fear of a 
man-eater robs a man of courage. As for running away, had I 
been one of the torchbearers I would have run with the best. 

So there was nothing for me to be angry about. Presently, while 
I was making believe to examine the leopard, to ease their 
embarrassment, the men returned in twos and threes. When 
they were assembled, I asked, without looking up, 'Did you 
bring a bamboo pole and rope to carry the leopard back to the 
village?' 'Yes,' they answered eagerly, 'we left them at the foot 
of the tree . 1 'Go and fetch them,' I said, 'for I want to get back 
to the village for a cup of hot tea.' The cold night-wind blowing 
down from the north had brought on another attack of malaria, 
and now that all the excitement was over I was finding it 
difficult to remain on my feet. 

That night, for the first time in years, the people of Sanouli 
slept, and have since continued to sleep, free from fear. 



he Chuka Man-Eater 


1 

CHUKA— WHICH GAVE ITS NAME to the man-eating tiger of 
the Ladhya valley— is a small village of some ten ploughs on 
the right bank of the Sarda river near its junction with the 
Ladhya. From the north-west corner of the village a path runs 
for a quarter of a mile along a fire track before it divides, one 
arm going straight up a ridge to Thak village and the other 
diagonally up and across the hills to Kotekindri, a village 
owned by the people of Chuka. 

Along this latter path a man was driving two bullocks in the 
winter of 1936, and as he approached Chuka, a tiger suddenly 
appeared on the fire track. With very commendable courage 
the man interposed himself between the tiger and his bullocks 
and, brandishing his stick and shouting, attempted to drive the 
tiger away. Taking advantage of the diversion created in their 
favour the bullocks promptly bolted to the village and the tiger, 
baulked of his prey, turned his attention to the man. Alarmed at 
the threatening attitude of the tiger the man turned to run and, 
as he did so, the tiger sprang on him. Across his shoulders the 
man had a heavy wooden plough, and on his back he was 
carrying a bag containing the provisions he needed for his stay 
at Chuka. While the tiger was expending its teeth and claws on 
the plough and bag, the man, relieved of his burdens, sprinted 
towards the village shouting for help as he ran. His relatives 
and friends, hearing his shouts, rallied to his assistance and he 
reached the village without further incident. One claw of the 
tiger had ripped his right arm from shoulder to wrist, inflicting 
a deep wound. 

Some weeks later two men returning from the market at 
Tanakpur were climbing the steep path to Kotekindri, when a 
tiger crossed the path fifty yards ahead of them. Waiting for a 
few minutes to give the tiger time to move away from the 
vicinity of the path, the men proceeded on their way, shouting 
as they went. The tiger had not moved away, however, and as 



the leading man came abreast of it, it sprang on him. This man 
was carrying a sack of gur (unrefined sugar), half of which was 
on his head and the other half on his back. The tiger's teeth 
caught in the sack and he carried it away down the hillside, 
without doing the man any injury. There is no record of what 
the tiger thought of the captures he had made so far— a plough 
and a sack of gur— but it can be assumed he was not satisfied 
with his bag, for, from now on, he selected human beings who 
were not burdened with either ploughs or sacks. 

Thak, which is about three thousand feet above Chuka, has 
quite a large population for a hill village. The Chand Rajas who 
ruled Kumaon before the advent of the Gurkhas, gave the lands 
of Thak to the forefathers of the present holders for their 
maintenance, and appointed them hereditary custodians of the 
Purnagiri temples. Rich lands and a considerable income from 
the temples have enabled the people of Thak to build 
themselves good substantial houses, and to acquire large herds 
of cattle. 

On a day early in June 1937, seven men and two boys were 
herding the village cattle, two hundred yards to the west of 
Thak. At 10 a.m. it was noticed that some of the cattle were 
beginning to stray off the open ground towards the jungle and 
one of the boys, aged fourteen, was sent to turn them back. Six 
hours later the men, who had been sleeping through the heat of 
the day, were aroused by the barking of a kakar in the jungle 
bordering the open ground, into which all the cattle had by 
now strayed, and the second boy who was also about fourteen 
was sent to drive them out. Shortly after he entered the jungle 
the cattle stampeded and as they were crossing an open ravine 
on their way to the village a tiger sprang on one of the cows, 
and killed it in full view of the seven men. The bellowing of the 
cattle and the shouts of the men attracted the attention of the 
people in the village, and a crowd soon collected on the high 
ground overlooking the ravine. The mother— a widow— of the 
second boy was among these people and, on hearing the men 
calling to her son, she ran towards them to inquire what had 



happened. On learning that her son had entered the jungle to 
drive out the cattle and had not returned, she set off to look for 
him. At this moment the parents of the first boy arrived on the 
scene and it was only when they asked where their son was 
that the seven men remembered they had not seen him since 
10 a.m. 

Followed by the large crowd of men who had now collected in 
the ravine near the dead cow, the distraught mother went into 
the jungle and found her son where the tiger had killed and left 
him, and under a near-by bush the parents of the first boy 
found their son dead and partly eaten. Close to this boy was a 
dead calf. From the accounts the villagers subsequently gave 
me of the tragic happenings of that day, I believe that the tiger 
was lying up in the jungle overlooking the ground on which the 
cattle were grazing, and when the calf, unseen by the men, 
entered the jungle the tiger killed it, and before it was able to 
carry it away, the boy either inadvertently or through curiosity 
approached the calf, was killed, dragged under the bush, and 
partly eaten. After this the tiger apparently lay up near his two 
kills until 4 p.m. when a kakar on its way to drink at the small 
pool on the edge of the clearing either saw or smelt it and 
started barking. This aroused the men to the fact that the cattle 
had strayed into the jungle, and the second boy who was sent 
to drive them out had the ill luck to go straight to the spot 
where the tiger was guarding his kills. 

The killing of the second boy was evidently witnessed by the 
cattle, who rallied to his rescue— I have seen this happen with 
both cows and buffaloes— and after driving the tiger from the 
boy they stampeded. Enraged at being driven off his kills, and 
at the rough treatment he had quite possibly received in the 
process, the tiger followed the stampeding cattle and wreaked 
his vengeance on the first one he was able to get hold of. Had 
the herd not run right on into the village he would probably not 
have been satisfied with killing only one of his attackers. In a 
similar case of attempted rescue I once saw an entire herd of 
five buffaloes wiped out in a titanic fight with an enraged tiger. 



The tiger killed one of their number and the other four big- 
hearted animals attacked him and fought on until the last of 
them had been killed. The tiger evidently suffered severely in 
the fight, for when he left the battle-ground he left a trail of 
blood. 

The seemingly wanton slaughter of two human beings and two 
animals on the same day— resulting I am convinced from the 
tiger's having been disturbed on his first kill— caused a great 
outcry in the districts of Nairn Tal and Almora, and every effort 
was made to kill the tiger. On several occasions district officials 
sat up all night on machans over kills, and though the tiger had 
been wounded on two occasions— unfortunately only with 
buckshot— he continued to prey on human beings, and claimed 
yet another victim from the ill-fated village of Thak. 

Two hundred yards above Thak there is a wheat field. The crop 
had been cut from this field and two boys were grazing a few 
cattle on the stubble. For safety's sake the boys, who were 
brothers and orphans ten and twelve years of age, were sitting 
in the middle of the field. On the far side of the field, from the 
village, there was a light fringe of bushes. From these the hill 
went steeply up for a thousand feet, and from anywhere on the 
hill the two boys sitting in the open would have been visible. 
Towards the afternoon a cow strayed towards the bushes and 
the boys, keeping close together, set off to drive it back on to 
the field. The elder boy was leading and as he passed a bush 
the tiger, who was lying in wait, pounced on him and carried 
him away. The younger boy fled back to the village and dashing 
up to a group of men fell sobbing at their feet. When the boy 
was able to speak coherently he told the men that big red 
animal— it was the first tiger he had ever seen— had carried 
away his brother. A search party was hastily organized and 
with very commendable bravery the blood trail was followed 
for about a mile into the densely wooded Suwar Gadh ravine to 
the east of the village. Night was now closing in, so the party 
returned to Thak. The following day, assisted by men from 
adjoining villages, a day-long search was made but all that was 



found of the boy was his red cap and his torn and bloodstained 
clothes. That was the Chuka man-eater's last human victim. 

I do not think it is possible to appreciate courage until danger 
that brought it into being has been experienced. Those who 
have never lived in an area in which a man-eating tiger is 
operating may be inclined to think that there was nothing 
courageous in a mother going to look for her son, in two boys 
grazing cattle, or in a party of men going out to look for a 
missing boy. But to one who has lived in such an area the entry 
of the mother into a dense patch of jungle in which she knew 
there was an angry tiger; the two small boys sitting close 
together for protection; and the party of unarmed men 
following on the blood trail left by a man-eater were acts 
calling for a measure of courage that merits the greatest 
admiration. 

The Chuka man-eater was now disorganizing life for everyone 
in the Ladhya valley, and shortly after Ibbotson had been 
appointed Deputy Commissioner-in-Charge of the three 
districts of Naini Tal, Almora, and Garhwal, we joined forces to 
try to rid his division of the menace. 

It was early afternoon on a sweltering hot day in April 1937 
that Ibby, his wife Jean, and I, alighted from our motor bus at 
the Boom above Baramdeo. We had left Naini Tal in the early 
hours of the morning and, travelling via Haldwani and 
Tanakpur, arrived at the Boom at the hottest time of the day, 
covered in dust from head to foot, and with many sore spots in 
unseen and tender places. A cup of tea drunk while sitting on 
yielding sand on the bank of the Sarda river helped restore our 
spirits, and taking the short cut along the river bank we set off 
on foot to Thuli Gadh where our tents, sent in advance, had 
been pitched. 

Starting after breakfast next morning we went to Kaladhunga. 
The distance between Thuli Gadh and Kaladhunga via the 
Sarda gorge is eight miles, and via Purnagiri, fourteen miles. 


The Ibbotsons and I went through the gorge while our servants 
and the men carrying our kit went via Purnagiri. The gorge is 
four miles long and was at one time traversed by a tramway 
line blasted out of the rock cliff by J. V Collier when extracting 
the million cubic feet of sal timber presented by the Nepal 
Durbar to the Government of India as a thank-offering after the 
First World War. The tramway line has long since been swept 
away by landslides and floods, and these four miles necessitate 
a great deal of rock climbing where a false step or the slipping 
of a hand-hold would inevitably precipitate one into the cold 
river. We negotiated the gorge without mishap, and at the 
upper end, where Collier's tramline entered the forest, we 
caught two fish in a run where a rock of the size of a house juts 
out into the river. 

Word had been sent ahead for the patwaris and forest guards 
working in the area to meet us at Kaladhunga and give us the 
latest news of the man-eater. We found four men awaiting our 
arrival at the bungalow and the reports they gave us were 
encouraging. No human beings had been killed within the past 
few days, and the tiger was known to be in the vicinity of Thak 
village where three days previously it had killed a calf. 

Kaladhunga is a gently rising cone-shaped peninsula roughly 
four miles long and a mile wide, surrounded on three sides by 
the Sarda river and backed on the fourth by a ridge of hills five 
thousand feet high. The bungalow, a three-roomed house with a 
wide veranda, faces east and is situated at the northern or 
upper end of the peninsula. The view from the veranda as the 
morning sun rises over the distant hills and the mist is lifting is 
one of the most pleasing prospects it is possible to imagine. 
Straight in front, and across the Sarda, is a wide open valley 
running deep into Nepal. The hills on either side are densely 
wooded, and winding through the valley is a river fringed with 
emerald-green elephant grass. As far as the eye can see there 
are no human habitations and, judging from the tiger and other 
animal calls that can be heard from the bungalow, there 
appears to be an abundant stock of game in the valley. It was 



from this valley that Collier extracted the million cubic feet of 
timber. 


We spent a day at Kaladhunga, and while our men went on to 
Chuka to pitch our tents and make camp we fished, or, to be 
correct, the Ibbotsons fished while I, who had been laid up with 
malaria the previous night, sat on the bank and watched. From 
the broken water below the bungalow to the point of the 
peninsula— a stretch of some five hundred yards— the 
Ibbotsons, who are expert thread-line casters, combed the river 
with their one-inch spoons without moving a fish. The small 
river that flows down the Nepal valley joins the Sarda opposite 
the point of the peninsula. Here the Sarda widens out and 
shallows, and flows for two hundred yards over rocks before 
entering a big pool. It was at the upper end of this run and well 
out in the river that Ibby hooked his first fish— an eight- 
pounder— which needed careful handling on the light tackle 
before it was eventually brought to the bank and landed. 

All keen anglers delight in watching others of the craft 
indulging in this, one of the best of outdoor sports. As for 
myself, I would just as soon watch another fishing than fish 
myself, especially when fish are on the take, the foothold 
uncertain— as it always is in the Sarda— and the river fairly 
fast. Shortly after Ibby killed his fish, Jean— who was fishing in 
broken water thirty yards from the bank— hooked a fish. Her 
reel only held a hundred yards of thread line, and fearing that 
the fish would make for the pool and break her, she attempted 
to walk backwards while playing the fish, and in doing so lost 
her footing and for a long minute all that was visible of her was 
the toe of one foot and the point of her rod. You will naturally 
assume that I, forgetting my recent attack of malaria, dashed 
out to her rescue. As a matter of fact I did nothing of the kind 
and only sat on the bank and laughed, for to attempt to rescue 
either of the Ibbotsons from a watery grave would be as futile 
as trying to save an otter from drowning. After a long and a 
violent struggle Jean upended herself, and reaching the bank 
killed her fish, which weighed six pounds. Hardly had she done 



so when Ibby, in making a long cast, slipped off the rock on 
which he was standing and disappeared under water, rod and 
all. 

From the bottom end of the pool below the run, the river turns 
to the right. On the Nepal side of this bend in the river there 
had stood a giant semul tree, in the upper branches of which a 
pair of ospreys had for many years built their nest. The tree 
had been an ideal home for the birds, for not only had it 
commanded an extensive view of the river, but the great 
branches growing out at right angles to the trunk had also 
provided tables on which to hold and devour their slippery 
prey. The monsoon floods of the previous year had cut into the 
bank and washed away the old tree and the ospreys had built 
themselves a new nest in a tall shisham tree standing at the 
edge of the forest, a hundred yards from the river. 

The run was evidently the favourite fishing ground of ospreys, 
and while the female sat in the nest the male kept flying 
backwards and forwards over the Ibbotsons 1 heads. Eventually 
tiring of this unprofitable exercise it flew farther down the river 
to where a few partly submerged rocks broke the surface of the 
water, making a small run. Fish were evidently passing this 
spot, and a dozen times the osprey banked steeply, closed his 
wings, and dropped like a plummet and, checking himself with 
widespread wings and tail before reaching the water, rose 
flapping to regain height for his next cast. At last his patience 
was rewarded. An unwary fish had come to the surface directly 
below him, and without a moment's pause he went from flat 
flight into a lightning dive through a hundred feet of air and 
plunged deep into the broken water. His needle-sharp and 
steel-strong talons took hold, but the catch was evidently 
heavier than he anticipated. Time and time again with wildly 
threshing wings he attempted to launch himself into the air, 
only to sink down again on his breast feathers. I believe he 
would have had to relinquish his catch had not a gust of wind 
blowing up river come at this critical moment to help him. As 
the wind reached him he turned downstream and, making one 



last desperate effort, got the fish clear of the water. Home was 
in the opposite direction from that in which he was now 
heading but to turn was impossible, so, selecting a great slab of 
rock on the bank on which to land, he made straight for it. 

I was not the only one who had been watching the osprey, for 
he had hardly landed on the rock when a woman who had been 
washing clothes on the Nepal side of the river called out 
excitedly, and a boy appeared on the high bank above her. 
Running, down the steep track to where the woman was 
standing, he received his instructions and set off along the 
boulder-strewn bank at a pace that threatened his neck and 
limbs at every stride. The osprey made no attempt to carry off 
his prey, and as the boy reached the rock it took to the air, 
circling round his head as he held up the fish— which appeared 
to be about four pounds in weight— for the woman to see. 

For some time thereafter I lost sight of the osprey, and we had 
finished our lunch before I again saw him guartering the air 
above the run in which he had caught the fish of which the boy 
had deprived him. Back and forth he flew for many minutes, 
always at the same height, and then he banked, dropped fifty 
feet, again banked and then plunged straight into the water. 
This time his catch was lighter— a kalabas about two pounds in 
weight— and without effort he lifted it clear of the water and, 
holding it like a torpedo to reduce wind pressure, made for his 
nest. His luck was out that day, however, for he had only 
covered half the distance he had to go, when a Pallas fish-eagle 
twice his weight and size came up from behind, rapidly 
overtaking him. The osprey saw him coming and altering his 
course a point to the right headed for the forest with the object 
of shaking off his pursuer among the branches of the trees. The 
eagle realizing the object of this manoeuvre emitted a scream 
of rage and increased his speed. Only twenty yards more to go 
to reach safety, but the risk was too great to take and, 
relinguishing his hold of the kalabas, the osprey— only just in 
time— hurled himself straight into the air. The fish had not 
fallen a yard before the eagle caught it and, turning in a 



graceful sweep, made off down river in the direction from 
which he had come. He was not to escape with his booty as 
easily as he expected, however, for he had only gone a short 
distance on his return journey when the pair of crows that fed 
on the osprey's leavings set off to bait him, and to shake them 
off he too was compelled to take to the forest. At the edge of 
the forest the crows turned back and the eagle had hardly 
disappeared from view when falling out of the sky came two 
Tawny eagles going at an incredible speed in the direct line the 
Pallas eagle had taken. I very greatly regret I did not see the 
end of the chase for, from the fact that while I watched neither 
of the birds rose out of the forest, I suspect that the Pallas 
eagle retained his hold on the fish too long. I have only once 
seen a more interesting chase. On that occasion I was taking a 
line of eighteen elephants through grass and the ten guns and 
five spectators who were sitting on the elephants, shooting 
black partridge, saw a bush chat pass— without once touching 
the ground— from a sparrow-hawk that killed it just in front of 
our line of elephants to a red-headed merlin, then to a honey 
buzzard, and finally to a peregrine falcon who swallowed the 
little bird whole. If any of the guns or spectators who were with 
me that February morning read this chapter, they will recall the 
occurrence as having taken place on the Rudrapur Maidan. 

After an early breakfast next morning we moved from 
Kaladhunga to Chuka, an easy march of five miles. It was one 
of those gorgeous days that live long in the memory of a 
fisherman. The sun was pleasantly warm; a cool wind blowing 
down from the north; a run of chilwa (fingerlings) in progress; 
and the river full of big fish madly on the take. Fishing with 
light tackle we had many exciting battles, all of which we did 
not win. We ended the day, however, with enough fish to feed 
our camp of thirty men. 

3 

To assist us in our campaign against the man-eater, and to try 
to prevent further loss of human life, six young male buffaloes 
had been sent up from Tanakpur in advance of us, to be used as 


bait for the tiger. On our arrival at Chuka we were told that the 
buffaloes had been tied out for three nights, and that though a 
tiger's pug-marks had been seen near several of them, none 
had been killed. During the next four days we visited the 
buffaloes in the early morning; tried to get in touch with the 
tiger during the day, and in the evening accompanied the men 
engaged in tying out the buffaloes. On the fifth morning we 
found that a buffalo we had tied up at Thak, at the edge of the 
jungle in which the two boys had lost their lives, had been 
killed and carried off by a tiger. Instead of taking its kill into 
the dense jungle as we had expected, the tiger had taken it 
across an open patch of ground, and up on to a rocky knoll. 

This it had evidently done to avoid passing near a machan from 
which it had been fired at— and quite possibly wounded— on 
two previous occasions. After the buffalo had been dragged for 
a short distance its horns got jammed between two rocks, and 
being unable to free it, the tiger had eaten a few pounds of 
flesh from the hindquarters of the kill and then left it. In 
casting round to see in which direction the tiger had gone, we 
found its pug-marks in a buffalo wallow, between the kill and 
the jungle. These pug-marks showed that the killer of the 
buffalo was a big male tiger. 

It was generally believed by the District Officials— on what 
authority I do not know— that the man-eater was a tigress. On 
showing them the tracks in the buffalo wallow we were told by 
the villagers that they could not distinguish between the pug- 
marks of different tigers and that they did not know whether 
the man-eater was male or female, but that they did know it 
had a broken tooth. In all the kills, human as well as animal, 
that had taken place near their village they had noticed that 
one of the tiger's teeth only bruised the skin and did not 
penetrate it. From this they concluded that one of the man- 
eater's canine teeth was broken. 

Twenty yards from the kill there was a jamun tree. After we 
had dragged the kill out from between the rocks we sent a man 
up the tree to break a few twigs that were obstructing a view of 



the kill from the only branch of the tree in which it was 
possible to sit. This isolated tree on the top of the knoll was in 
full view of the surrounding jungle, and though the man 
climbed it and broke the twigs with the utmost care, I am 
inclined to think he was seen by the tiger. 

It was now 11 a.m., so, sending our men back to the village to 
have their midday meal, Ibby and I selected a bush under 
which to shelter from the sun and talked and dozed, and dozed 
and talked throughout the heat of the day. At 2.30 p.m., while 
we were having a picnic lunch, some kalege pheasants started 
chattering agitatedly at the edge of the jungle where the 
buffalo had been killed, and on hearing them our men returned 
from the village. While Ibby and his big-hearted man. Sham 
Singh, went into the jungle where the pheasants were 
chattering— to attract the tiger's attention— I climbed silently 
into the jamun tree. Giving me a few minutes in which to settle 
down, Ibby and Sham Singh came out of the jungle and 
returned to our camp at Chuka, leaving my two men at Thak. 

Shortly after Ibby had gone the pheasants started chattering 
again and a little later a kakar began barking. The tiger was 
evidently on the move, but there was little hope of his crossing 
the open ground and coming to the kill until the sun had set 
and the village had settled down for the night. 

The kakar barked for a quarter of an hour or more before it 
finally stopped, and from then until sunset, except for the 
natural calls of a multitude of birds, the jungle— as far as the 
tiger was concerned— was silent. 

The red glow from the setting sun had faded from the Nepal 
hills on the far side of the Sarda river, and the village sounds 
had died down, when a kakar barked in the direction of the 
buffalo wallow; the tiger was returning to his kill along the line 
he had taken when leaving it. A convenient branch in front of 
me gave a perfect rest for my rifle, and the only movement it 
would be necessary to make when the tiger arrived would be to 
lower my head on to the rifle butt. Minute succeeded minute 



until a hundred had been added to my age and then, two 
hundred yards up the hillside, a kakar barked in alarm and my 
hope of getting a shot, which I had put at ten to one, dropped 
to one in a thousand. It was now quite evident that the tiger 
had seen my man breaking the twigs off the tree, and that 
between sunset and the barking of this last kakar he had 
stalked the tree and seeing me on it had gone away From then 
on kakar and sambhar called at intervals, each call a little 
farther away than the last. At midnight these alarm calls 
ceased altogether, and the jungle settled down to that nightly 
period of rest ordained by Nature, when strife ceases and the 
jungle folk can sleep in peace. Others who have spent nights in 
an Indian jungle will have noticed this period of rest, which 
varies a little according to the season of the year and the 
phases of the moon, and which as a rule extends from midnight 
to 4 a.m. Between these hours killers sleep. And those who go 
in fear of them are at peace. It may be natural for carnivores to 
sleep from midnight to 4 a.m., but I would prefer to think that 
Nature had set apart these few hours so that those who go in 
fear of their lives can relax and be at peace. 

Day was a few minutes old when, cramped in every joint, I 
descended from the tree and, unearthing the thermos flask 
Ibby had very thoughtfully buried under a bush, indulged in a 
much needed cup of tea. Shortly after my two men arrived and 
while we were covering the kill with branches, to protect it 
from vultures, the tiger called three times on a hill half a mile 
away. As I passed through Thak on my way back to camp the 
greybeards of the village met me and begged me not to be 
discouraged by my night's failure, for, they said, they had 
consulted the stars and offered prayers and if the tiger did not 
die this day it would certainly die on the next or, may be, the 
day after. 

A hot bath and a square meal refreshed me and at 1 p.m. I 
again climbed the steep hill to Thak and was told on my arrival 
that a sambhar had belled several times on the hill above the 
village. I had set out from camp with the intention of sitting up 



over a live buffalo; and, to ensure while doing so that the tiger 
did not feed in one place while I was waiting for him in another, 
I placed several sheets of newspaper near the kill I had sat 
over the previous night. There was a well-used cattle track 
through the jungle in which the villagers said the sambhar had 
called. In a tree on the side of this track I put up a rope seat, 
and to a root on the track I tied the buffalo. I climbed into the 
tree at three o'clock, and an hour later first a kakar and then a 
tiger called on the far side of the valley a thousand yards away 
The buffalo had been provided with a big feed of green grass, 
and throughout the night it kept the bell I had tied round its 
neck ringing, but it failed to attract the tiger. At daylight my 
men came for me and they told me that sambhar and kakar had 
called during the night in the deep ravine in which the boy's 
red cap and torn clothes had been found, and at the lower end 
of which we had tied up a buffalo at the request of the 
villagers. 

When I got back to Chuka I found that Ibby had left camp 
before dawn. News had been received late the previous 
evening that a tiger had killed a bullock eight miles up the 
Ladhya valley. He sat up over the kill all night without seeing 
anything of the tiger, and late the following evening he 
returned to camp. 

4 

Jean and I were having breakfast after my night in the tree 
over the live buffalo, when the men engaged in tying out our 
remaining five buffaloes came in to report that the one they 
had tied up at the lower end of the ravine in which my men had 
heard the sambhar and kakar calling the previous night was 
missing. While we were being given this news MacDonald, 
Divisional Forest Officer, who was moving camp that day from 
Kaladhunga to Chuka, arrived and told us he had seen the pug- 
marks of a tiger at the lower end of a ravine where he 
presumed one of our buffaloes had been tied up. These pug- 
marks, Mac said, were similar to those he had seen at Thak 
when on a previous visit he had tried to shoot the man-eater. 


After breakfast, Jean and Mac went down the river to fish while 
I went off with Sham Singh to try to find out what had become, 
of the missing buffalo. Beyond the broken rope and the tiger's 
pug-marks there was nothing to show that the buffalo had been 
killed. However, on casting round I found where one of the 
buffalos' horns had come in contact with the ground and from 
here on there was a well-defined blood trail. Whether the tiger 
lost his bearings after killing the buffalo or whether he was 
trying to cover up his tracks I do not know, for after taking the 
kill over most difficult ground for several miles he brought it 
back to the ravine two hundred yards from where he had 
started. At this point the ravine narrowed down to a bottle-neck 
some ten feet wide. The tiger was probably lying up with his 
kill on the far side of the narrow neck, and as I intended sitting 
up for him all night I decided to join the anglers and share their 
lunch before sitting up. 

After fortifying the inner man, I returned with Sham Singh and 
three men borrowed from the fishing party, for if I found I he 
kill and sat up over it it would not have been safe for Sham 
Singh to have gone back to camp alone. Walking well ahead of 
the four men I approached the bottle-neck for the second time, 
and as I did so the tiger started growling. The ravine here was 
steep and full of boulders and the tiger was growling from 
behind a dense screen of bushes, about twenty yards straight 
in front of me. An unseen tiger's growl at close range is the 
most terrifying sound in the jungle, and is a very definite 
warning to intruders not to approach any nearer. In that 
restricted space, and with the tiger holding a commanding 
position, it would have been foolish to have gone any farther. 

So, signalling to the men to retire, and giving them a few 
minutes to do so, I started to walk backwards very slowly— the 
only safe method of getting away from any animal with which 
one is anxious not to make contact. As soon as I was well clear 
of the bottle-neck I turned and, whistling to the men to stop, 
rejoined them a hundred yards farther down the ravine. I now 
knew exactly where the tiger was, and felt confident I would be 



able to deal with him; so, on rejoining the men, I told them to 
leave me and return to the fishing party. This, however, they 
were very naturally frightened to do. They believed, as I did, 
that the tiger they had just heard growling was a man-eater 
and they wanted to have the protection of my rifle. To have 
taken them back myself would have lost me two hours, and as 
we were in a sal forest and there was not a climbable tree in 
sight, I had of necessity to keep them with me. 

Climbing the steep left bank we went straight away from the 
ravine for two hundred yards. Here we turned to the left and 
after I had paced out two hundred yards we again turned to the 
left and came back to the ravine a hundred yards above where 
we had heard the tiger growling. The tables were now turned 
and we held the advantage of position. I knew the tiger would 
not go down the ravine, for he had seen human beings in that 
direction, only a few minutes before; nor would he go up the 
ravine, for in order to do so he would have to pass us. The bank 
on our side was thirty feet high and devoid of undergrowth, so 
the only way the tiger could get out of the position we had 
manoeuvred him into would be to go up the opposite hillside. 
For ten minutes we sat on the edge of the ravine scanning 
every foot of ground in front of us. Then, moving back a few 
paces, we went thirty yards to the left and again sat down on 
the edge and, as we did so, the man sitting next to me 
whispered 'sher', and pointed across the ravine. I could see 
nothing, and on asking the man how much of the tiger he could 
see, and to describe its position, he said he had seen its ears 
move and that it was near some dry leaves. A tiger's ears are 
not conspicuous objects at fifty yards, and as the ground was 
carpeted with dead leaves his description did nothing to help 
me locate the tiger. From the breathing of the men behind me 
it was evident that excitement was rising to a high pitch. 
Presently one of the men stood up to get a better view, and the 
tiger, who had been lying down facing us, got up and started to 
go up the hill, and as his head appeared from behind a bush I 
fired. My bullet, I subsequently found, went through the ruff on 



his neck and striking a rock splintered back, making him spring 
straight up into the air, and on landing he got involved with a 
big creeper from which he found some difficulty in freeing 
himself. When we saw him struggling on the ground we 
thought he was down for good, but when he regained his feet 
and galloped off Sham Singh expressed the opinion, which I 
shared, that he was unwounded. Leaving the men I crossed the 
ravine and on examining the ground found the long hairs the 
bullet had clipped, the splintered rock, and the torn and bitten 
creeper, but I found no blood. 

Blood does not always flow immediately after an animal has 
been hit, and my reconstruction of the shot may have been 
faulty; so it was necessary to find the kill, for it would tell me 
on the morrow whether or not the tiger was wounded. Here we 
had some difficulty, and it was not until we had gone over the 
ground twice that we eventually found the kill in a pool of 
water four feet deep, where the tiger had presumably put it to 
preserve it from hornets and blowflies. Sending the three men I 
had borrowed back to the fishing party— it was safe to do so 
now— Sham Singh and I remained hidden near the kill for an 
hour to listen for jungle sounds and then, hearing none, 
returned to camp. After an early breakfast next morning Mac 
and I returned to the ravine and found that the tiger had 
removed the kill from the pool, carried it a short distance, and 
eaten it out leaving only the head and hooves. This, together 
with the absence of blood on the ground on which he had been 
lying while eating, was proof that the tiger was not wounded 
and that he had recovered from his fright. 

When we got back to camp we were informed that a cow had 
been killed in a wide open ravine on the far side of the Ladhya 
river, and that the men who had found it had covered it with 
branches. Ibby had not returned from his visit to the village 
eight miles up the Ladhya, and after lunch Mac and I went out 
to look at the cow. It had been covered up at midday and 
shortly afterwards the tiger had returned, dug it out from 
under the branches, and carried it away without leaving any 



mark of a drag. The forest here consisted of great big sal trees 
without any undergrowth, and it took us an hour to find the kill 
where the liger had hidden it under a great pile of dead leaves. 
In a nearby tree Mac very gallantly put up a machan for me 
while I smoked and emptied his water-bottle— the shade 
temperature was about a hundred and ten degrees— and after 
seeing me into the tree he returned to camp. An hour later a 
small stone rolling down the steep hill on the far side of the 
ravine attracted my attention, and shortly after a tigress came 
into view, followed by two small cubs. This was quite evidently 
the first occasion on which the cubs had ever been taken to a 
kill, and it was very interesting to see the pains the mother 
took to impress on them the danger of the proceeding and the 
great caution it was necessary to exercise. The behaviour of the 
cubs was as interesting as their mother's. Step by step they 
followed in her tracks; never trying to pass each other, or her; 
avoiding every obstruction that she avoided no matter how 
small it was, and remaining perfectly rigid when she stopped to 
listen, which she did every few yards. The ground was carpeted 
with big sal leaves as dry as tinder over which it was 
impossible to move silently; however, every pad was put down 
carefully and as carefully lifted, and as little sound as possible 
was made. 

Crossing the ravine, the tigress, closely followed by the cubs, 
came towards me and passing behind my tree lay down on a 
flat piece of ground overlooking the kill, and about thirty yards 
from it. Her lying down was apparently intended as a signal to 
the cubs to go forward in the direction in which her nose was 
pointing, and this they proceeded to do. By what means the 
mother conveyed the information to her cubs that there was 
food for them at this spot I do not know, but that she had 
conveyed this information to them there was no question. 
Passing their mother— after she had lain down— and 
exercising the same caution they had been made to exercise 
when following her, they set out with every appearance of 
being on a very definite quest. I have repeatedly asserted that 



tigers have no sense of smell, and the cubs were providing me 
with ample proof of that assertion. Though the kill had only 
been reported to us that morning the cow had actually been 
killed the previous day and before hiding it under the pile of 
dead leaves the tigress had eaten the greater portion of it. The 
weather, as I have said, was intensely hot, and it was the smell 
that eventually enabled Mac and me to find the kill. And here, 
now, were two hungry cubs ranging up and down, back and 
forth, passing and repassing a dozen times within a yard of the 
kill and yet not being able to find it. It was the blowflies that 
disclosed its position and at length enabled them to find it. 
Dragging it out from under the leaves the cubs sat down 
together to have their meal. The tigress had watched her cubs 
as intently as I had and only once, when they were questing too 
far afield, had she spoken to them. As soon as the kill had been 
found the mother turned on to her hack with her legs in the air 
and went to sleep. 

As I watched the cubs feeding I was reminded of a scene I had 
witnessed some years previously at the foot of Trisul. I was 
lying on a ridge scanning with field glasses a rock cliff opposite 
me for thar, the most sure-footed of all Himalayan goats. On a 
ledge halfway up the cliff a thar and her kid were lying asleep. 
Presently the thar got to her feet, stretched herself, and the kid 
immediately started to nuzzle her and feed. After a minute or 
so the mother freed herself, took a few steps along the ledge, 
poised for a moment, and then jumped down on to another and 
a narrower ledge some twelve to fifteen feet below her. As soon 
as it was left alone the kid started running backwards and 
forwards, stopping every now and then to peer down at its 
mother, but unable to summon the courage to jump down to 
her for, below the few-inches-wide ledge, was a sheer drop of a 
thousand feet. I was too far away to hear whether the mother 
was encouraging her young, but from the way her head was 
turned I believe she was doing so. The kid was now getting 
more and more agitated and, possibly fearing that it would do 
something foolish, the mother went to what looked like a mere 



crack in the vertical rock face and, climbing it, rejoined her 
young. Immediately on doing so she lay down, presumably to 
prevent the kid from feeding. After a little while she again got 
to her feet, allowed the kid to drink for a minute, poised 
carefully on the brink, and jumped down, while the kid again 
ran backwards and forwards above her. Seven times in the 
course of the next half-hour this procedure was gone through, 
until finally the kid, abandoning itself to its fate, jumped, and 
landing safely beside its mother was rewarded by being 
allowed to drink its fill. The lesson, to teach her young that it 
was safe to follow where she led, was over for that day. Instinct 
helps, but it is the infinite patience of the mother and the 
unquestioning obedience of her offspring that enable the young 
of all animals in the wild to grow to maturity. I regret I lacked 
the means, when I had the opportunity, of making 
cinematographic records of the different species of animals I 
have watched training their young, for there is nothing more 
interesting to be seen in a jungle. 

When the cubs finished their meal they returned to their 
mother and she proceeded to clean them, rolling them over and 
licking off the blood they had acquired while feeding. When 
this job was finished to her entire satisfaction she set off, with 
the cubs following close behind, in the direction of a shallow 
ford in the Ladhya, for nothing remained of the kill and there 
was no suitable cover for her cubs on this side of the river. 

I did not know, and it would have made no difference if I had, 
that the tigress I watched with such interest that day would 
later, owing to gunshot wounds, become a man-eater and a 
terror to all who lived or worked in the Ladhva valley and the 
surrounding villages. 

The kill at Thak, over which I had sat the first night, had been 
uncovered to let the vultures eat it, and another buffalo had 
been tied up at the head of the valley to the west of the village 
and about two hundred yards from the old kill. Four mornings 


later the headman of Thak sent word to us that this buffalo had 
been killed by a tiger and carried away. 

Our preparations were soon made, and after a terribly hot 
climb Ibby and I reached the scene of the kill at about midday 
The tiger, after killing the buffalo and breaking a very strong 
rope, had picked up the kill and gone straight down into the 
valley Telling the two men we had brought to carry our lunch 
to keep close behind us, we set off to follow the drag. It soon 
became apparent that the tiger was making for some definite 
spot, for he led us for two miles through dense undergrowth, 
down steep banks, through beds of nettles and raspberry 
bushes, over and under fallen trees, and over great masses of 
rock until finally he deposited the kill in a small hollow under a 
box tree shaped like an umbrella. The buffalo had been killed 
the previous night and the fact that the tiger had left it without 
having a meal was disquieting. However, this was to a great 
extent offset by the pains he had taken in getting the kill to this 
spot, and if all went well there was every reason to hope that 
he would return to his kill, for, from the teeth-marks on the 
buffalo's neck, we knew he was the man-eater we were looking 
for and not just an ordinary tiger. 

Our hot walk up to Thak and subsequent descent down the 
densely wooded hillside, over difficult ground, had left us in a 
bath of sweat, and while we rested in the hollow having lunch 
and drinking quantities of tea, I cast my eyes round for a 
convenient tree on which to sit and, if necessary in which to 
pass the night. Growing on the outer edge of the hollow and 
leaning away from the hill at an angle of forty-five degrees was 
a ficustree. This, starting life in some decayed part of a giant of 
the forest, had killed the parent tree by weaving a trellis round 
it, and this trellis was now in course of coalescing to form a 
trunk for the parasite. Ten feet from the ground, and where the 
trellis had stopped and the parent tree had rotted and fallen 
away, there appeared to be a comfortable seat on which I 
decided to sit. 



Lunch eaten and a cigarette smoked, Ibby took our two men 
sixty yards to the right and sent them up a tree to shake the 
branches and pretend they were putting up a machan, to 
distract the tiger's attention in case he was lying up close by 
and watching us, while I as silently as possible climbed into the 
ficus tree. The seat I had selected sloped forward and was 
cushioned with rotten wood and dead leaves and, fearing that if 
I brushed them off the sound and movement might be detected 
by the tiger, I left them as they were and sat down on them, 
hoping devoutly that there were no snakes in the hollow trunk 
below me or scorpions in the dead leaves. Placing my feet in an 
opening in the trellis, to keep from slipping forward, I made 
myself as comfortable as conditions permitted, and when I had 
done so Ibby called the men off the tree and went away talking 
to them in a loud voice. 

The tree in which I had elected to sit was, as I have already 
said, leaning outwards at an angle of forty-five degrees, and 
ten feet immediately below me there was a flat bit of ground 
about ten feet wide and twenty feet long. From this flat piece of 
ground the hill fell steeply away and was overgrown with tall 
grass and dense patches of brushwood, beyond which I could 
hear a stream running; an ideal place for a tiger to lie up in. 

Ibby and the two men had been gone about fifteen minutes 
when a red monkey on the far side of the valley started barking 
to warn the jungle folk of the presence of a tiger. From the fact 
that this monkey had not called when we were coming down 
the hill, following the drag, it was evident that the tiger had not 
moved off at our approach and that he was now coming to 
investigate— as tigers do— the sounds he had heard in the 
vicinity of his kill. Monkeys are blessed with exceptionally good 
eyesight, and though the one that was calling was a quarter of 
a mile away, it was quite possible that the tiger he was calling 
at was close to me. 

I was sitting facing the hill with the kill to my left front, and the 
monkey had only called eight times when I heard a dry stick 



snap down the steep hillside behind me. Turning my head to 
the right and looking through the trellis, which on this side 
extended a little above my head, I saw the tiger standing and 
looking in the direction of my tree, from a distance of about 
forty yards. For several minutes he stood looking alternately in 
my direction and then in the direction of the tree the two men 
had climbed, until eventually, deciding to come in my direction, 
he started up the steep hillside. It would not have been possible 
for a human being to have got over that steep and difficult 
ground without using his hands and without making 
considerable noise, but the tiger accomplished the feat without 
making a sound. The nearer he came to the flat ground the 
more cautious he became and the closer he kept his belly to the 
ground. When he was near the top of the bank he very slowly 
raised his head, took a long look at the tree the men had 
climbed, and satisfied that it was not tenanted sprang up on to 
the flat ground and passed out of sight under me. I expected 
him to reappear on my left and go towards the kill, and while I 
was waiting for him to do so I heard the dry leaves under the 
tree being crushed as he lay down on them. 

For the next quarter of an hour I sat perfectly still, and as no 
further sounds came to me from the tiger I turned my head to 
the right, and craning my neck looked through an opening in 
the trellis, and saw the tiger's head. If I had been able to 
squeeze a tear out of my eye and direct it through the opening 
it would, believe, have landed plumb on his nose. His chin was 
resting on the ground and his eyes were closed. Presently he 
opened them and blinked a few times to drive away the flies, 
then closed them again and went to sleep. Regaining my 
position I now turned my head to the left. On this side there 
was no trellis nor were there any branches against which I 
could brace myself, and when I had craned my neck as far as I 
could without losing my balance I looked down and found I 
could see most of the tiger's tail, and a part of one hind leg. 

The situation needed consideration. The bole of the tree 
against which I had my back was roughly three feet thick and 



afforded ideal cover, so there was no possibility of the tiger 
seeing me. That he would go to the kill if not disturbed was 
certain; the question was, when would he go? It was a hot 
afternoon, but the spot he had selected to lie on was in deep 
shade from my tree and, further, there was a cool breeze 
blowing up the valley In these pleasant conditions he might 
sleep for hours and not approach the kill until day light had 
gone, taking with it my chance of getting a shot. The risk of 
waiting on the tiger's pleasure could not be taken, therefore, 
for apart from the reason given the time at our disposal was 
nearly up and this might be the last chance I would get of 
killing the tiger, while on that chance might depend the lives of 
many people. Waiting for a shot being inadvisable, then, there 
remained the possibility of dealing with the tiger where he lay. 
There were several openings in the trellis on my right through 
which I could have inserted the barrel of my rifle, but having 
done this it would not have been possible to depress the muzzle 
of the rifle sufficiently to get the sights to bear on the tiger's 
head. To have stood up, climbed the trellis, and fired over the 
top of it would not have been difficult. But this could not have 
been done without making a certain amount of noise, for the 
dry leaves I was sitting on would have crackled when relieved 
of my weight, and within ten feet of me was an animal with the 
keenest hearing of any in the jungle. A shot at the head end of 
the tiger not being feasible, there remained the tail end. 

When I had both my hands on the rifle and craned my neck to 
the left, I had been able to see most of the tiger's tail and a 
portion of one hind leg. By releasing my right hand from the 
rifle and getting a grip of the trellis I found I could lean out far 
enough to see one-third of the tiger. If I could maintain this 
position after releasing my hold, it would be possible to disable 
him. The thought of disabling an animal, and a sleeping one at 
that, simply because he occasionally liked a change of diet was 
hateful. Sentiment, however, where a man-eater was concerned 
was out of place. I had been trying for days to shoot this tiger 
to save further loss of human life, and now that I had a chance 



of doing so the fact that I would have to break his back before 
killing him would not justify my throwing away that chance. So 
the killing would have to be done no matter how unpleasant the 
method might be, and the sooner it was done the better, for in 
bringing his kill to this spot the tiger had laid a two-mile-long 
scent trail, and a hungry bear finding that trail might at any 
moment take the decision out of my hands. Keeping my body 
perfectly rigid I gradually released my hold of the trellis, got 
both hands on the rifle, and fired a shot behind and under me 
which I have no desire ever to repeat. When I pressed the 
trigger of the 450/400 high-velocity rifle, the butt was pointing 
to heaven and I was looking under, not over, the sights. The 
recoil injured but did not break either my fingers or my wrist, 
as I had feared it would, and as the tiger threw the upper part 
of his body round and started to slide down the hill on his back, 
I swung round on my seat and fired the second barrel into his 
chest. I should have felt less a murderer if, at my first shot, the 
tiger had stormed and raved but— being the big-hearted 
animal that he was— he never opened his mouth, and died at 
my second shot without having made a sound. 

Ibby had left me with the intention of sitting up in 
the jamun tree over the buffalo which had been killed four days 
previously and which the vultures had, for some unknown 
reason, not eaten. He thought that if the tiger had seen me 
climbing into the ficus tree it might abandon the kill over which 
I was sitting and go back to its old kill at Thak and give him a 
shot. On hearing my two shots he came hurrying back to see if 
I needed his help, and I met him half a mile from the ficus tree. 
Together we returned to the scene of the killing to examine the 
tiger. He was a fine big male in the prime of life and in perfect 
condition, and would have measured— if we had had anything 
to measure him with— nine feet six inches between pegs, or 
nine feet ten over curves. And the right canine tooth in his 
lower jaw was broken. Later I found several pellets of buckshot 
embedded in different parts of his body. 

The tiger was too heavy for the four of us to carry back to camp 



so we left him where he lay, after covering him up with grass, 
branches, and deadwood heaped over with big stones, to 
protect him from bears. Word travelled round that night that 
the man-eating tiger was dead and when we carried him to the 
loot of the ficus tree next morning to skin him, more than a 
hundred men and boys crowded round to see him. Among the 
latter was the ten-year-old brother of the Chuka man-eater's 
last human victim. 



he Talla Des Man-Eater 


1 

NOWHERE ALONG THE FOOTHILLS of the Himalayas is there 
a more beautiful setting for a camp than under the Flame of 
the Forest trees at Bindukhera, when they are in full bloom. If 
you can picture white tents under a canopy of orange-coloured 
bloom; a multitude of brilliantly plumaged red and gold 
minivets, golden orioles, rose-headed parakeets, golden backed 
woodpeckers, and wire-crested drongos flitting from tree to 
tree and shaking down the bloom until the ground round the 
tents resembled a rich orange-coloured carpet; densely wooded 
foothills in the background topped by ridge upon rising ridge of 
the Himalayas, and they in turn topped by the eternal snows, 
then, and only then, will you have some idea of our camp at 
Bindukhera one February morning in the year 1929. 

Bindukhera, which is only a name for the camping ground, is 
on the western edge of a wide expanse of grassland some 
twelve miles long and ten miles wide. When Sir Henry Ramsay 
was king of Kumaon the plain was under intensive cultivation, 
but at the time of my story there were only three small villages, 
each with a few acres of cultivation dotted along the banks of 
the sluggish stream that meanders down the length of the 
plain. The grass on the plain had been burnt a few weeks 
before our arrival, leaving islands of varying sizes where the 
ground was damp and the grass too green to burn. It was on 
these islands that we hoped to find the game that had brought 
us to Bindukhera for a week's shooting. I had shot over this 
ground for ten years and knew every foot of it, so the running 
of the shoot was left to me. 

Shooting from the back of a well-trained elephant on the 
grasslands of the Tarai is one of the most pleasant forms of 
sport I know of. No matter how long the day may be, every 
moment of it is packed with excitement and interest, for in 
addition to the variety of game to be shot— on a good day I 
have seen eighteen varieties brought to bag ranging from quail 



and snipe to leopard and swamp deer— there is a great wealth 
of bird life to ordinarily be seen when walking through grass on 
foot. 

There were nine guns and five spectators in camp on the first 
day of our shoot that February morning, and after an early 
breakfast we mounted our elephants and formed a line, with a 
pad elephant between every two guns. Taking my position in 
the centre of the line, with four guns and four pad elephants on 
either side of me, we set off due south with the flanking gun on 
the right— fifty yards in advance of the line— to cut off birds 
that rose out of range of the other guns and were making for 
the forest on the right. If you are ever given choice of position 
in a line of elephants on a mixed-game shoot select a flank, but 
only if you are good with both gun and rifle. Game put up by a 
line of elephants invariably try to break out at a flank, and one 
of the most difficult objects to hit is a bird or an animal that has 
been missed by others. 

When the air is crisp and laden with all the sweet scents that 
are to be smelt in an Indian jungle in the early morning, it goes 
to the head like champagne, and has the same effect on birds, 
with the result that both gunsand birds tend to be too quick off 
the mark. A too eager gun and a wild bird do not produce a 
heavy bag, and the first few minutes of all glorious days are 
usually as unproductive as the last few minutes when muscles 
are tired and eyes strained. Birds were plentiful that morning, 
and, after the guns had settled down, shooting improved and in 
our first beat along the edge of the forest we picked up five 
peafowl, three red jungle fowl, ten black partridges, four grey 
partridges, two bush quails, and three hares. A 
good sambhar had been put up but he gained the shelter of the 
forest before rifles could be got to bear on him. 

Where a tongue of forest extended out on to the plain for a few 
hundred yards, I halted the line. This forest was famous for the 
number of peafowl and jungle fowl that were always to be 
found in it, but as the ground was cut up by a number of deep 



nullahs that made it difficult to maintain a straight line, I 
decided not to take the elephants through it, for one of the 
guns was inexperienced and was shooting from the back of an 
elephant that morning for the first time. It was in this forest— 
when Wyndham and I some years previously were looking for a 
tiger— that I saw for the first time a cardinal bat. These 
beautiful bats, which look like gorgeous butterflies as they flit 
from cover to cover, are, as far as I know, only to be found in 
heavy elephant-grass. 

After halting the line I made the elephants turn their heads to 
the east and move off in single file. When the last elephant had 
cleared the ground over which we had just beaten, I again 
halted them and made them turn their heads to the north. We 
were now facing the Himalayas, and hanging in the sky directly 
in front of us was a brilliantly lit white cloud that looked solid 
enough for angels to dance on. 

The length of a line of seventeen elephants depends on the 
ground that is being beaten. Where the grass was heavy I 
shortened the line to a hundred yards, and where it was light I 
extended it to twice that length. We had beaten up to the north 
for a mile or so, collecting thirty more birds and a leopard, 
when a ground owl got up in front of the line. Several guns 
were raised and lowered when it was realized what the bird 
was. These ground owls, which live in abandoned pangolin and 
porcupine burrows, are about twice the size of a partridge, look 
white on the wing, and have longer legs than the ordinary run 
of owls. When flushed by a line of elephants they fly low for 
fifty to a hundred yards before alighting. This I believe they do 
to allow the line to clear their burrows, for when flushed a 
second time they invariably fly over the line and back to the 
spot from where they originally rose. The owl we flushed that 
morning, however, did not behave as these birds usually do, for 
after flying fifty to sixty yards in a straight line it suddenly 
started to gain height by going round and round in short 
circles. The reason for this was apparent a moment later when 
a peregrine falcon, flying at great speed, came out of the forest 



on the left. Unable to regain the shelter of its burrow the owl 
was now making a desperate effort to keep above the falcon. 
With rapid wing beats he was spiralling upwards, while the 
falcon on widespread wings was circling up and up to get 
above his quarry All eyes, including those of themahouts, were 
now on the exciting flight, so I halted the line. 

It is difficult to judge heights when there is nothing to make a 
comparison with. At a rough guess the two birds had reached a 
height of a thousand feet, when the owl— still moving in circles 
— started to edge away towards the big white cloud, and one 
could imagine the angels suspending their dance and urging it 
to make one last effort to reach the shelter of their cloud. The 
falcon was not slow to see the object of this manoeuvre, and he 
too was now beating the air with his wings and spiralling up in 
ever-shortening circles. Would the owl make it or would he 
now, as the falcon approached nearer to him, lose his nerve and 
plummet down in a vain effort to reach mother earth and the 
sanctuary of his burrow? Field glasses were now out for those 
who needed them, and up and down the line excited 
exclamations— in two languages— were running. 

'Oh! he can't make it.' 

'Yes he can, he can.' 

'Only a little way to go now.' 

'But look, look, the falcon is gaining on him.' And then, 
suddenly, only one bird was to be seen against the cloud. 'Well 
done! well done! Shahbashl shahbash!' The owl had made it, 
and while hats were being waved and hands were being 
clapped, the falcon in a long graceful glide came back to 
the semul tree from which he had started. 

The reactions of human beings to any particular event are 
unpredictable. Fifty-four birds and four animals had been shot 
that morning— and many more missed— without a qualm or 
the batting of an eyelid. And now, guns, spectators, 
and mahouts were unreservedly rejoicing that a ground owl 



had escaped the talons of a peregrine falcon. 

At the northern end of the plain I again turned the line of 
elephants south, and beat down along the right bank of the 
stream that provided irrigation water for the three villages. 
Here on the damp ground the grass was unburnt and heavy, 
and rifles were got ready, for there were many hog deer and 
swamp deer in this area, and there was also a possibility of 
putting up another leopard. 

We had gone along the bank of the stream for about a mile, 
picking up five more peafowl, four cock florican— hens were 
barred— three snipe, and a hog deer with very good horns 
when the accidental (please turn your eyes away. Recording 
Angel) discharge of a heavy high-velocity rifle in the hands of a 
spectator sitting behind me in my howdah, scorched the inner 
lining of my left ear and burst the eardrum. For me the rest of 
that February day was torture. After a sleepless night I excused 
myself on the plea that I had urgent work to attend to (again, 
please. Recording Angel) and at dawn, while the camp was 
asleep, I set out on a twenty-five-mile walk to my home at 
Kaladhungi. 

The doctor at Kaladhungi, a keen young man who had recently 
completed his medical training, confirmed my fears that my 
eardrum had been destroyed. A month later we moved up to 
our summer home at Naini Tal, and at the Ramsay 
Hospital (now Govind Ballabh Pant Hospital) I received further 
confirmation of this diagnosis from Colonel Barber, Civil 
Surgeon of Naini Tal. Days passed, and it became apparent that 
abscesses were forming in my head. My condition was 
distressing my two sisters as much as it was distressing me, 
and as the hospital was unable to do anything to relieve me I 
decided— much against the wishes of my sisters and the advice 
of Colonel Barber— to go away. 

I have mentioned this 'accident 7 not with the object of enlisting 
sympathy but because it has a very important bearing on the 
story of the Talla Des man-eater which I shall now relate. 



2 

Bill Baynes and Ham Vivian were Deputy Commissioners of, 
respectively Almora and Naini Tal in the year 1929, and both 
were suffering from man-eaters, the former from the Talla Des 
man-eating tiger, and the latter from the Chowgarh man-eating 
tiger. 

I had promised Vivian that I would try to shoot his tiger first, 
but as it had been less active during the winter months than 
Baynes's, I decided, with Vivian's approval, to try for the other 
first. The pursuit of this tiger would, I hoped, tide me over my 
bad time and enable me to adjust myself to my new condition. 
So to Talla Des I went. 

My story concerns the Talla Des tiger, and I have refrained 
from telling it until I had written Jungle Lore. For without first 
reading Jungle Lore, and knowing that I had learnt— when a 
boy and later— how to walk in a jungle and use a rifle, and the 
credulity of all who were not present in Kumaon at that time 
would have been strained and this, after my previous stories 
had been accepted at their face value, was the last thing I 
desired. 

My preparations were soon made and on 4 April I left Naini Tal 
accompanied by six Garhwalis, among whom were Madho 
Singh and Ram Singh, a cook named Elahai, and a Brahmin, 
Ganga Ram, who did odd jobs and was very keen to go with me. 
Walking the fourteen miles down to Kathgodam we caught the 
evening train and, travelling through Bareilly and Pilibhit, 
arrived at noon next day at Tanakpur. Here I was met by 
thepeshkar, who informed me that a boy had been killed the 
previous day by the Talla Des man-eater, and that under 
Baynes's orders two young buffaloes— to be used as bait— had 
been dispatched for me via Champawat to Talla Des. After my 
men had cooked and eaten their food and I had breakfasted at 
the dak bungalow, we started off in good heart to try to walk 
the twenty-four miles to Kaladhunga (not to be confused with 
Kaladhungi) the same night. 


The first twelve miles of the road— through Baramdeo to the 
foot of the sacred Purnagiri mountain— runs through forest 
most of the way. At the foot of the mountain the road ends, and 
there is the choice of two tracks to Kaladhunga. One, the 
longer, goes steeply up the left-hand side of the mountain to 
the Purnagiri temples, over a shoulder of the mountain, and 
down to Kaladhunga. The other track follows the alignment of 
the tramway line made by Collier when extracting the million 
cubic feet of sal timber that I have already spoken of. Collier's 
tramline— where it ran for four miles through the Sarda river 
gorge— has long since been washed away, but portions of the 
track he blasted across the perpendicular rock lace of the 
mountain still remain. The going over this portion of the track 
was very difficult for my heavily laden Garhwalis, and night 
came on when we were only halfway through the gorge. 

Finding a suitable place on which to camp for the night was not 
easy, but after rejecting several places made dangerous by 
falling stones we eventually found a narrow shelf where the 
overhanging rock offered measure of safety. Here we decided 
to spend the night, and after I had eaten my dinner and while 
the men were cooking their food with driftwood brought up 
from the river I undressed and lay down on my camp bed, the 
only article of camp equipment, excluding a washbasin and a 
forty-pound tent, that I had brought with me. 

The day had been hot and we had covered some sixteen miles 
since detraining at Tanakpur. I was comfortably tired and was 
enjoying an after-dinner cigarette, when on the hill on the far 
side of the river I suddenly saw three lights appear. The forests 
in Nepal are burnt annually, the burning starting in April. Now, 
on seeing the lights, I concluded that the wind blowing down 
the gorge had fanned to flame the smouldering embers in some 
dead wood. As I idly watched these fires two more appeared a 
little above them. Presently the left-hand one of these two new 
fires moved slowly down the hill and merged into the central 
one of the original three. I now realized that what I had 
assumed were fires, were not fires but lights, all of a uniform 



size of about two feet in diameter, burning steadily without a 
flicker or trace of smoke. When presently more lights 
appeared, some to the left and others farther up the hill, an 
explanation to account for them presented itself. A potentate 
out on shikar had evidently lost some article he valued and had 
sent men armed with lanterns to search for it. Admittedly a 
strange explanation, but many strange things happen on the far 
side of that snow-fed river. 

My men were as interested in the lights as I was, and as the 
river below us flowed without a ripple and the night was still, I 
asked them if they could hear voices or any other sounds— the 
distance across was about a hundred and fifty yards— but they 
said they could hear nothing. Speculation as to what was 
happening on the opposite hill was profitless, and as we were 
tired out after our strenuous day the camp was soon wrapped 
in slumber. Once during the night a ghooral sneezed in alarm 
on the cliff above us, and a little later a leopard called. 

A long march and a difficult climb lay before us. I had warned 
my men that we would make an early start, and light was just 
showing in the east when I was given a cup of hot tea. Breaking 
camp, when only a few pots and pans had to be put away and a 
camp bed dismantled, was soon accomplished. As the cook and 
my Garhwalis streamed off in single file down a goat track into 
a deep ravine, which in Collier's clay had been spanned by an 
iron bridge, I turned my eyes to the hill on which we had seen 
the lights. The sun was not far from rising, and distant objects 
were now clearly visible. From crest to water's edge and from 
water's edge to crest I scanned every foot of the hill, first with 
my naked eyes and then with field glasses. Not a sign of any 
human being could I see, or, reverting to my first theory, was 
there any smouldering wood, and it only needed a glance to see 
that the vegetation in this area had not been burnt for a year. 
The hill was rock from top to bottom, a few stunted trees and 
bushes growing where roothold had been found in crack or 
cranny. Where the lights had appeared was a perpendicular 
rock where no human being, unless suspended from above. 



could possibly have gone. 

Nine days later, my mission to the hill people accomplished, I 
camped for a night at Kaladhunga. For a lover of nature, or for 
a keen fisherman, there are few places in Kumaon to compare 
with Kaladhunga. From the bungalow Collier built when 
extracting the timber Nepal gave India, the land slopes gently 
down in a series of benches to the Sarda river. On these 
benches, where crops grew in the bygone days, there is now a 
luxuriant growth of grass. Here sambhar and cheetal are to be 
seen feeding morning and evening, and in the beautiful forests 
behind the bungalow live leopards and tigers, and a wealth of 
bird life including peafowl, jungle fowl, and kalege pheasants. 

In the big pools and runs below the bungalow some of the best 
fishing in the Sarda river is to be had, either on a spinning rod 
with plug bait or on a light rod with salmon fly or fly spoon. 

At crack of dawn next morning we left Kaladhunga, Ganga Ram 
taking the mountain track to Purnagiri and the rest of us the 
shorter way through the Sarda gorge. Ganga Ram's mission— 
which would entail an additional ten-miles walk— was to 
present our thank-offerings to the sacred Purnagiri shrine. 
Before he left me I instructed him to find out all he could, from 
the priests who served the shrine, about the lights we had seen 
when on our way up to Talla Des. When he rejoined me that 
evening at Tanakpur he gave me the following information, 
which he had gleaned from the priests and from his own 
observations. 

Purnagiri, dedicated to the worship of the Goddess Bhagbatti 
and visited each year by tens of thousands of pilgrims, is 
accessible by two tracks. These, one from Baramdeo and the 
other from Kaladhunga, meet on the northern face of the 
mountain a short distance below the crest. At the junction of 
the tracks is situated the less sacred of the two Purnagiri 
shrines. The more sacred shrine is higher up and to the left. 
This holy of holies can only be reached by going along a narrow 
crack, or fault, running across the face of a more or less 



perpendicular rock cliff. Nervous people, children, and the 
aged are carried across the cliff in a basket slung on the back 
of a hillman. Only those whom the Goddess favours are able to 
reach the upper shrine; the others are struck blind and have to 
make their offerings at the lower shrine. 

Puja (prayer) at the upper shrine starts at sunrise and ends at 
midday. After this hour no one is permitted to pass the lower 
shrine. Near the upper and more sacred shrine is a pinnacle of 
rock a hundred feet high, the climbing of which is forbidden by 
the Goddess. In the days of long ago a sadhu, more ambitious 
than his fellows, climbed the pinnacle with the object of putting 
himself on an equality with the Goddess. Incensed at his 
disregard of her orders, the Goddess hurled the sadhu from the 
pinnacle to the hill on the far side of the snow-fed river. It is 
this sadhu who, banished for ever from Purnagiri, worships the 
Goddess two thousand feet above him by lighting lamps to her. 
These votive lights only appear at certain times (we saw them 
on 5 April) and are only visible to favoured people. This favour 
was accorded to me and to the men with me, because I was on 
a mission to the hillfolk over whom the Goddess watches. 

That in brief was the information regarding the light which 
Ganga Ram brought back from Purnagiri and imparted to me 
while we were waiting for our train at Tanakpur. Some weeks 
later I received a visit from the Rawal (High Priest) of 
Purnagiri. He had come to see me about an article I had 
published in a local paper on the subject of the Purnagiri lights, 
and to congratulate me on being the only European ever to 
have been privileged to see them. In my article I gave the 
explanation for the lights as I have given it in these pages, and 
I added that if my readers were unable to accept this 
explanation and desired to find one for themselves, they should 
bear the following points in mind: 

The lights did not appear simultaneously. 

They were of a uniform size (about two feet in diameter). 



They were not affected by wind. 

They were able to move from one spot to another. 

The High Priest was emphatic that the lights were an 
established fact which no one could dispute— in this I was in 
agreement with him for I had seen them for myself— and that 
no other explanation than the one I had given could be 
advanced to account for them. 

The following year I was fishing the Sarda with Sir Malcolm 
(now Lord) Hailey who was Governor of the United Provinces 
at the time. Sir Malcolm had seen my article and as we 
approached the gorge he asked me to point out the spot where 
I had seen the lights. We had four dhimas (fishermen) with us 
who were piloting the sarnis (inflated skins) on which we were 
floating down the river from one fishing stand to the next. 

These men were part of a gang of twenty engaged by a 
contractor in floating pine sleepers from the high-level forests 
in Kumaon and Nepal to the boom at Baramdeo. This was a 
long, difficult, and very dangerous task, calling for great 
courage and a thorough knowledge of the river and its many 
hazards. 

Below the shelf blasted out of the cliff by Collier, on which my 
men and I had spent the night when on our way up to Talla Des, 
was a narrow sandy beach. Here the dhimas at my request 
brought the sarnis to the bank, and we went ashore. After I had 
pointed out where the lights had appeared, and traced their 
movements on the hill. Sir Malcolm said the dhimas could 
possibly provide an explanation, or at least throw some light on 
the subject. So he turned to them— he knew the correct 
approach to make to an Indian when seeking information and 
could speak the language perfectly— and elicited the following 
information. Their homes were in the Kangra Valley where they 
had some cultivation, but not sufficient to support them. They 
earned their living by floating sleepers down the Sarda river 
for Thakur Dan Singh Bist. They knew every foot of the river as 
far down as Baramdeo, for they had been up and down it 



countless times. They knew this particular gorge very well, for 
there were backwaters in it that hung up the sleepers and gave 
them a great deal of trouble. They had never seen anything 
unusual in this part of the river in the way of lights, or anything 
else. 

As he turned away from the dhimas I asked Sir Malcolm to put 
one more question to them. Had they in all the years they had 
been working on the Sarda ever spent a night in the gorge? 
Their answer to this question was a very emphatic No! 
Questioned further they said that not only had they never spent 
a night in the gorge but that they had never heard of anyone 
else ever having done so. The reason they gave for this was 
that the gorge was haunted by evil spirits. 

Two thousand feet above us a narrow crack, worn smooth by 
the naked feet of generations upon generations of devotees, 
ran for fifty yards across a perpendicular rock cliff where there 
was no handhold of any kind. In spite of the precautions taken 
by the priests to safeguard the lives of pilgrims, casualties 
while negotiating that crack were heavy until H. H. The 
Maharaja of Mysore provided funds a few years ago for a steel 
cable to be stretched across the face of the cliff, from the lower 
shrine to the upper. 

So there well might be spirits at the foot of that cliff but not, I 
think, evil ones. 

3 

Now to get back to my story. 

Ganga Ram, who could cover the ground as fast as any man in 
Kumaon, had stayed back with me to carry my camera, and we 
caught up with the cook and the six Garhwalis two miles from 
where we had spent the night. For the next six hours we 
walked with never a pause, at times through dense forests and 
at times along the bank of the Sarda river. Our way took us 
through Kaladhunga and through Chuka to the foot of the 
mountain, on the far side of which was our objective, the 


hunting grounds of the Talla Des man-eater. At the foot of the 
mountain we halted for two hours— to cook and eat our midday 
meal— before essaying the four-thousand-foot climb. 

In the afternoon, with the hot April sun blazing down on our 
backs and without a single tree to shade us, we started on one 
of the steepest and most exhausting climbs my men and I had 
ever undertaken. The so-called road was only a rough track 
which went straight up the face of the mountain without a 
single hairpin bend to ease the gradient. After repeated and 
many halts we arrived at sunset at a little hamlet, a thousand 
feet from the crest. We had been warned at Chuka to avoid this 
hamlet, for, being the only inhabited place on the southern face 
of the mountain, it was visited regularly by the man-eater. 
However, man-eater or no man-eater, we could go no farther, so 
to the hamlet— which was a few hundred yards from the track 
— we went. The two families in the hamlet were delighted to 
see us and after we had rested and eaten our evening meal, my 
men were provided with accommodation behind locked doors, 
while I settled down on my camp bed under a tree that 
sheltered the tiny spring which provided the two families with 
drinking water, with a rifle and a lantern to keep me company. 

Lying on my bed that night I had ample time to review the 
situation. Instructions had been issued by Bill Baynes to 
headmen of villages not to disturb any human or other kills, 
pending my arrival. The boy the peshkarof Tanakpur had told 
me about, had been killed on the fourth and it was now the 
night of the sixth. Since leaving the train at Tanakpur we had 
not spared ourselves in an effort to try to get to the scene of 
the killing with as little delay as possible. I knew the tiger 
would have eaten out his kill before our arrival and that, if he 
was not disturbed, he would probably remain in the vicinity for 
a day or two. I had hoped when leaving camp that morning that 
we would reach our destination in time to tie out one of the 
young buffaloes, but the climb up from the Sarda had been too 
much for us. Regrettable as the loss of one day was, it could 
not be helped, and I could only hope that if the tiger had moved 



away from the scene of his kill, he had not gone far. One of the 
disadvantages I had to contend with was that I did not know 
this part of Kumaon. The tiger had been operating for eight 
years and had made one hundred and fifty human kills, so it 
was reasonable to assume he was working over a very large 
area. If contact with him was once lost it might be weeks 
before it could again be made. However, worrying over what 
the tiger had done, or what he might do, was profitless, so I 
went to sleep. 

I was to make an early start and it was still quite dark when 
Ganga Ram roused me by lighting the lantern which had gone 
out during the night. While breakfast was being got ready I had 
a bath at the spring, and the sun was just rising over the Nepal 
mountains when, having cleaned and oiled my -275 Rigby 
Mauser rifle and put five rounds in the magazine, I was ready 
to start. Inter-village communication had been interrupted by 
the man-eater and the two men in the hamlet had not heard 
about the tiger's last kill, so they were unable to give me any 
information as to the direction, or the distance, we would have 
to go. Not knowing when my men would get their next meal I 
told them to have a good one now and to follow me when they 
were ready, keeping close together and selecting open places 
to sit down in when they wanted to rest. 

Rejoining the track up which we had laboured the previous 
evening, I halted for a spell to admire the view. Below me the 
valley of the Sarda was veiled in shadow and a wisp of mist 
showed where the river wound in and out through the foothills 
to emerge at Tanakpur. Beyond Tanakpur the eye could follow 
the river as a gleaming silver ribbon, until lost to sight on the 
horizon. Chuka was in shadow and partly obscured by mist, but 
I could see the path winding up to Thak, every foot of which I 
was to know when hunting the Thak man-eater ten years later. 
Thak village, gifted hundreds of years ago by the Chand Rajas 
of Kumaon to the priests who see the Purnagiri shrines, was 
bathed in the morning sun, as was also the pinnacle of 
Purnagiri. 



Twenty-five years have come and gone since I turned away 
from that view to complete the last stage of my journey to Talla 
Des— a long period, in which much has happened. But time 
does not efface events graven deep on memory's tablets, and 
the events of the five days I spent hunting the man-eating tiger 
of Talla Des are as clear-cut and fresh in my memory today as 
they were twenty-five years ago. 

On the far side of the hill I found the track that I was on joined 
a quite good forest road some six feet wide, running east and 
west. Here I was faced with a dilemma, for there were no 
villages in sight and I did not know in which direction to go. 
Eventually, on the assumption that the road to the east could 
only take me out of my way as far as the Sarda, I decided to try 
it first. 

Given the option of selecting my own time and place for a walk 
anywhere, I would unhesitatingly select a morning in early 
April on the northern face of a well-wooded hill in the 
Himalayas. In April all Nature is at her best; deciduous trees 
are putting out new leaves, each of a different shade of green 
or bronze; early violets, buttercups, and rhododendrons are 
giving way to later primulas, larkspurs, and orchids; and the 
birds— thrushes, babblers, minivets, tits, and a host of others— 
that migrated to the foothills for the winter are back on their 
nesting grounds and vie with each other in their joyous mating 
songs. Walking carefree and at ease in a forest in which there 
is no danger, only those objects and sounds which please the 
senses are looked at and listened to with any degree of 
attention, and all the other less-arresting sights and sounds 
blend together to form a pleasing whole. When there is danger 
from a man-eating tiger, however, the carefree feeling gives 
way to intense awareness. 

Danger not only adds zest to all forms of sport, it also tends to 
sharpen the faculties and to bring into focus all that is to be 
seen and heard in a forest. Danger that is understood, and 
which you are prepared to face, does not detract in any way 



from pleasure. The bank of violets does not lose any of its 
beauty because the rock beyond it may shelter a hungry tiger, 
and the song of the black-headed sibia, poured out from the 
topmost branch of an oak tree, is none the less pleasing 
because a scimitar-babbler at the foot of the tree is warning 
the jungle folk of the presence of danger. 

Fear may not be a heritage to some fortunate few, but I am not 
of their number. After a lifelong acquaintance with wild life I 
am no less afraid of a tiger's teeth and claws today than I was 
the day that a tiger shooed Magog and me out of the jungle in 
which he wanted to sleep. But to counter that fear and hold it 
in check I now have the experience that I lacked in those early 
years. Where formerly I looked for danger all round me and 
was afraid of every sound I heard, I now knew where to look for 
danger, and what sounds to ignore or pay special attention to. 
And, further, where there was uncertainty where a bullet would 
go, there was now a measure of certainty that it would go in 
the direction I wanted it to. Experience engenders confidence, 
and without these two very important assets the hunting of a 
man-eating tiger on foot, and alone, would be a very unpleasant 
way of committing suicide. 

The forest road I was walking on that April morning ran 
through an area in which a man-eating tiger was operating and 
had been used by the tiger frequently, as was evident from the 
scratch marks on it. In addition to these marks, none of which 
was fresh enough to show the pug-marks of the tiger which had 
made them, there were many tracks of 
leopard, sambhar, bear, kakar, and pig. Of birds there were 
many varieties, and of flowers there was great profusion, the 
most beautiful of which was the white butterfly orchid. These 
orchids hang down in showers and veil the branch or the trunk 
of the tree to which their roots are attached. One of the most 
artistic nests I have ever seen was that of a Himalayan black 
bear, made in a tree on which orchids were growing. A big oak 
tree had snapped off, either by weight of snow or in a storm, 
some forty feet above ground. Where the break had taken place 



a ring of branches, the thickness of a man's arm, had sprouted 
out at right angles to the trunk. Here moss had grown and in 
the moss butterfly orchids had found root-hold. It was here 
among these orchids that a bear had made its nest by bending 
over and pressing down the branches on to the broken-off tree 
trunk. The trees selected by bears in which to make their nests 
are of the variety whose branches will bend without snapping. 
The nests have nothing to do with family affairs and I have seen 
them at altitudes of from two thousand to eight thousand feet. 
At the lower altitudes, to which bears descend during the 
winter months to feed on wild plums and honey, the nests give 
protection from ants and flies, and at the higher altitudes they 
enable the animals to bask undisturbed in the sun. 

When a road is interesting its length does not register on one's 
consciousness. I had been walking for about an hour when the 
forest ended and I came out on a grassy ridge overlooking a 
village. My approach over the open ground was observed, and 
when I reached the village the whole population appeared to 
have turned out to greet me. I often wonder whether in any 
other part of the world a stranger whose business was not 
known, arriving unexpectedly at a remote village, would be 
assured of the same welcome and hospitality as he would 
receive at any village throughout the length and breadth of 
Kumaon. I was possibly the first white man who had ever 
approached that village alone and on foot, and yet, by the time 
I reached the assembled people, a square of carpet had been 
produced, a morha (rush seat) placed on it, and I had hardly sat 
down before a brass vessel containing milk was placed in my 
hands. A lifelong association with the hillfolk enables me to 
understand the different dialects that are spoken in Kumaon 
and, what is just as important, to follow their every thought. As 
I had arrived armed with a rifle it was taken for granted that I 
had come to rid them of the man-eater, but what was puzzling 
them was my arrival on foot at that early hour when the 
nearest bungalow at which I could have spent the night was 
thirty miles away. 



Cigarettes, passed round while I was drinking the milk, 
loosened tongues, and after I had answered the many questions 
put to me I put a few of my own. The name of the village, I 
learnt, was Tamali. The village had suffered for many years 
from the man-eater. Some said eight years and others said ten, 
but all were agreed that the man-eater had made its 
appearance the year that Bachi Singh had cut off his toes while 
splitting wood with an axe, and Dan Singh's black bullock, for 
which he had paid thirty rupees, had fallen down the hill and 
got killed. The last person killed at Tamali by the man-eater 
had been Kundan's mother. She had been killed on the 
twentieth day of the previous month (March), while working 
with other women in a field below the village. No one knew 
whether the tiger was a male or a female, but all knew it was a 
very big animal, the fear of which was now so great that the 
outlying fields were no longer being cultivated and no one was 
willing to go to Tanakpur to get the food that was needed for 
the village. The tiger was never absent from Tamali for long, 
and if I stayed with them, which they begged me to do, I would 
have a better chance of shooting it than anywhere else in Talla 
Des. 

To leave people who place implicit trust in you to the tender 
mercies of a man-eater is not easy. However, my reason for 
doing so was accepted, and, after I had assured the fifty or 
more people gathered round me that I would return to Tamali 
at the first opportunity, I bade them goodbye and set off to try 
to find the village where the last kill had taken place. 

At the point where the track from the hamlet met the forest 
road I removed the sign I had placed on the road to indicate to 
my men that I had gone east, and replaced in on the road to the 
west, and, to ensure that there would be no mistake, I put a 
'road closed' sign on the road to the east. The two signs I have 
mentioned are known throughout the hills, and, though I had 
not told my men that I would use them, I knew they would 
understand that I had laid them and would interpret them 
correctly. The first sign consists of a small branch laid in the 



middle of the road, held in position with a stone or bit of wood, 
with the leaves pointing in the direction in which it is intended 
that the person following should go. The second sign consists of 
two branches crossed, in the form of an X. 

The road to the west was level most of the way and ran through 
a forest of giant oak trees standing knee-deep in bracken and 
maidenhair fern. Where there were openings in this forest 
there were magnificent views of hills upon rising hills backed 
by the snowy range extending to east and west as far as the 
eye could see. 

4 

After going for some four miles due west the forest road turned 
to the north and crossed the head of a valley. Flowing down the 
valley was a crystal-clear stream which had its birth in the 
dense oak forest on the hill that towered above me on my left. 
Crossing the stream on stepping-stones, and going up a short 
rise, I came out on an open stretch of ground on the far side of 
which was a village. Some girls coming down from the village 
on their way to the stream caught sight of me as I came out on 
the open ground, and they called out in great excitement, 'The 
Sahib has come! The Sahib has come!' The cry was caught up 
from house to house and before I reached the village I was 
surrounded by an excited throng of men, women, and children. 

From the headman I learnt that the name of the village was 
Talla Kote. That a patwari had arrived two days previously (5 
April) from Champawat, to meet me and to tell all the people in 
the district that a sahib was coming from Naini Tal to try to 
shoot the man-eater. That shortly after the arrival of 
the patwari a woman of the village had been killed by the man- 
eater, and that in obedience to orders received from the Deputy 
Commissioner, Almora, the kill had not been disturbed. And 
finally that in anticipation of my arrival a party of men had 
been sent that morning to look for the kill and, if there was 
anything left of it, to put up a machanfor me. While the 
headman was giving me this information the party, numbering 


some thirty men, returned. These men told me that they had 
searched the ground where the tiger had eaten its kill and that 
all they had been able to find were the woman's teeth. Even her 
clothes, they said, were missing. When I asked where the kill 
had taken place, a lad of about seventeen who was with the 
party of men said that if I would accompany him to the other 
side of the village he would point out to me where his mother 
had been killed by the man-eater. With the lad leading and the 
throng of men, women, and children following me, we went 
through the village to a narrow saddle some fifty yards long 
connecting two hills. This saddle was the apex of two great 
valleys. The one on the left, or western side, swept down 
towards the Ladhya river; the one on the right fell steeply away 
and down ten or fifteen miles to the Kali river. Halting on the 
saddle the lad turned and faced the valley on the right. The 
left-hand or northern, side of this valley was under short grass 
with an odd bush scattered here and there, and the right-hand 
side was under dense scrub and tree jungle. Pointing to a bush 
on the grassy side eight hundred to a thousand yards away and 
a thousand to fifteen hundred feet below us, the lad said his 
mother had been killed near it while cutting grass in company 
with several other women. Then pointing to an oak tree in the 
ravine, the branches of which had been broken by langurs, he 
said it was under that tree that they had found the remains of 
his mother. Of the tiger, he said, neither he nor any of the party 
of men with him had seen or heard anything, but that when 
they were on their way down the hill they had heard first 
a ghooral, and then a little later, a langur calling. 

A ghooral and a langur calling. Ghooral do occasionally call on 
seeing human beings, but not langurs. Both will call on seeing 
a tiger, however. Was it possible that the tiger had lingered 
near the scene of its kill and on being disturbed by the party of 
men had moved off and been seen, first by the ghooral, and 
then by the langur? While I was speculating on this point, and 
making a mental map of the whole country that stretched 
before me, the patwari, who had been having his food when I 



arrived, joined me. Questioned about the two young buffaloes 
for which I had asked Baynes, the patwari said he had started 
out with them from Champawat and that he had left them at a 
village ten miles from Talla Kote, where a boy had been killed 
by the man-eater on 4 April within sight of the village. As there 
was no one on the spot to deal with the man-eater, the body 
had been recovered, and after a report of the occurrence had 
been sent to Champawat, from where it had been telegraphed 
to Tanakpur for my information, he had given orders for the 
body of the boy to be cremated. 

My men had not yet arrived from the hamlet where we spent 
the night, so, after instructing the headman to have my tent 
pitched on the open ground near the stream, I decided to go 
down and have a look at the ground where the tiger had eaten 
his kill, with the object of finding out if the man-eater was male 
or female, and if the latter, whether she had cubs. This part of 
Kumaon was, as I have already said, unknown to me, and when 
I asked the headman if he could tell me the easiest way to get 
down into the valley the lad, who had pointed out to me where 
his mother had been killed and eaten, stepped forward and said 
very eagerly, 'I will come with you. Sahib, and show you the 
way. 1 

The courage of people living in an area in which there is 
danger from a man-eater, and the trust they are willing to place 
in absolute strangers, has always been a marvel to me. The lad, 
whose name I learnt was Dungar Singh, was yet another 
example of that courage and trust. For years Dungar Singh had 
lived in fear of the man-eater and only an hour previously he 
had seen the pitiful remains of his mother. And yet, alone and 
unarmed, he was willing to accompany an absolute stranger 
into an area in which he had every reason to believe— from the 
alarm call of a ghooral and a langur— that the killer of his 
mother was lurking. True, he had only recently visited that 
area, but on that occasion he had been accompanied by thirty 
of his friends, and in numbers there was safety. 



There was no way down the steep hillside from the saddle, so 
Dungar Singh led me back through the village to where there 
was a goat track. As we went down through scattered bushes I 
told him that my hearing was defective, that if he wanted to 
draw my attention to any particular thing to stop and point to 
it, and that if he wanted to communicate with me to come close 
and whisper into my right ear. We had gone about four hundred 
yards when Dungar Singh stopped and looked back. Turning 
round and looking in the same direction, I saw 
the patwari followed by a man carrying a shotgun hurrying 
down the hill after us. Thinking they had important information 
for me, I awaited their arrival and was disappointed to find that 
all the patwari wanted was to accompany me with his gun- 
bearer. This, very reluctantly, I permitted him to do for neither 
he nor his gun-bearer— both of whom were wearing heavy 
boots— looked like men who could move in a jungle without 
making considerable noise. 

We had gone another four hundred yards through dense scrub 
jungle, when we came out on a clearing a few yards square. 
Here, where the goat track divided, one arm going towards a 
deep ravine on the left while the other followed the contour of 
the hill to the right, Dungar Singh stopped, and pointing in the 
direction of the ravine whispered that it was down there that 
the tiger had eaten his mother. As I did not wish the ground on 
which I wanted to look for pug-marks to be disturbed by booted 
men, I told Dungar Singh to stay on the open ground with the 
two men, while I went down alone into the ravine. As I stopped 
talking Dungar Singh whipped round and looked up the hill. 
When I looked in the same direction I saw a crowd of men 
standing on the saddle of the hill where I had stood a little 
while before. With a hand stretched out towards us to ensure 
silence, and the other cupped to his ear, Dungar Singh was 
intently listening, occasionally nodding his head. Then with a 
final nod he turned to me and whispered, 'My brother says to 
tell you that in the wyran field below you, there is something 
red lying in the sun. 1 



A wyran field is one that has gone out of cultivation, and below 
us on such a field there was something red lying in the sun. 
Maybe the red object was only a bit of dry bracken, or 
a kakar or young sambhar, but it might be a tiger. Anyway, I 
was not going to risk spoiling what might turn out to be a 
heaven-sent chance. So, handing my rifle to Dungar Singh, I 
took the patwari and his man, each by an arm, and led them to 
a medlar tree growing near by. Unloading the patwari 1 s gun 
and laying it under a bush, I told the two men to climb the tree 
and on pain of death to remain quietly in it until I ordered them 
to come down. I do not think any two men ever climbed into a 
tree more gladly and from the way they clung to the branches 
after they had climbed as high as it was safe to go, it was 
evident that their views on man-eater hunting had undergone a 
drastic change since they followed me from the village. 

The goat track to the right led on to a terraced field which had 
long been out of cultivation, and on which there was a luxuriant 
growth of oat grass. This field, about a hundred yards long, was 
ten feet wide at my end and thirty feet wide at the other, where 
it terminated on a ridge. For fifty yards the field was straight 
and then it curved to the left. As Dungar Singh saw me looking 
at it, he said that from the farther end we would be able to see 
down on to the wyran field on which his brother had seen the 
red object. Bending down and keeping to the inner edge of the 
field we crept along until we came to the far end. Here we lay 
down, and, crawling on hands and knees to the edge of the 
field, parted the grass and looked down. 

Below us was a small valley with, on the far side, a steep grassy 
slope fringed on the side farthest from us by a dense growth of 
oak saplings. Beyond the saplings was the deep ravine in which 
the man-eater had eaten Dungar Singh's mother. The grassy 
slope was about thirty yards wide and below it was a rock cliff 
which, judging from the trees growing at the foot, was from 
eighty to a hundred feet high. On the near side of the slope was 
a terraced field, a hundred yards long and some ten yards 
wide. The field, which was in a straight line with us, had a 



small patch of short emerald-green grass at our end. On the 
remainder was a dense growth of an aromatic type of weed 
which grows to a height of four or five feet and has leaves like 
chrysanthemums, the undersides of which are white. Lying in 
brilliant sunlight on the patch of grass, and about ten feet 
apart, were two tigers. 

The nearer tiger had its back to us with its head towards the 
hill, and the farther one had its stomach to us with its tail 
towards the hill. Both were fast asleep. The nearer offered the 
better shot, but I was afraid that on hearing the smack of the 
bullet the farther one would go straight down the hill into 
dense cover, in the direction in which its head was pointing. 
Whereas if I fired at the farther one first, the smack of the 
bullet— not to be confused with the crack of the rifle— would 
either drive the nearer one up the hill where there was less 
cover or else drive it towards me. So I decided to take the 
farther one first. The distance was approximately one hundred 
and twenty yards, and the angle of fire was not so steep that 
any allowance had to be made for the lift of the bullet, a point 
which has to be kept in mind when shooting downhill on the 
Himalayas. Resting the back of my hand on the edge of the 
field, to form a cushion, and holding the rifle steady, I took 
careful aim at where I thought the animal's heart would be and 
gently pressed the trigger. The tiger never moved a muscle, but 
the other one was up like a flash and in one bound landed on a 
five-foot-high bank of earth that divided the field from a 
rainwater channel. Here the second tiger stood, broadside on 
to me, looking back over its right shoulder at its companion. At 
my shot it reared up and fell over backwards into the rainwater 
channel, and out of sight. 

After my second shot I saw a movement in the aromatic weeds 
which started close to where the dead tiger was lying. A big 
animal was going at full gallop straight along the field. Having 
started from so close to where the two tigers had been lying, 
this third animal could only be another tiger. I could not see the 
animal, but I could follow its movements by the parting of the 



weeds, the leaves of which were white on the underside. 
Flicking up the two-hundred-yard leaf-sight I waited for the 
animal to break cover. Presently out on to the grassy slope 
dashed a tiger. I now noticed that the slope the tiger was on 
curved to the right, in the same way as the field I was lying on 
curved to the left. As the tiger was keeping to the contour of 
the hill this curve in the slope enabled me to get a near¬ 
broadside shot at it. 

I have seen animals fall over at a shot, and I have seen them 
crumple up, but I have never seen an animal fall as 
convincingly dead as that tiger fell at my shot. For a few 
moments it lay motionless and then it started to slide down, 
feet foremost, gaining momentum as it went. Directly below it, 
and within a few feet of the brink of the rock cliff, was an oak 
sapling eight to ten inches thick. The tiger struck this sapling 
with its stomach and came to rest with its head and forelegs 
hanging down on one side and its tail and hindlegs hanging 
down on the other. With rifle to shoulder and finger on trigger I 
waited, but there was not so much as a quiver in the tiger. 
Getting to my feet I beckoned to the patwari, who from his seat 
on the medlar tree had obtained a grandstand view of the 
whole proceedings. Dungar Singh, who had lain near me 
breathing in short gasps, was now dancing with excitement and 
from the way he was glancing at the tigers and then up at the 
crowd of people on the saddle, I knew he was thinking of the 
tale he would have to tell that night and for many moons 
thereafter. 

When I saw the two tigers lying asleep I concluded that the 
man-eater had found a mate, but later, when my third shot 
flushed a third tiger, I knew I was dealing with a tigress and 
her two cubs. Which of the three was the mother and which the 
cubs it was not possible to say, for all three looked about the 
same size when I had viewed them over the sights of my rifle. 
That one of the three was the man-eater of Talla Des there 
could be no question, for tigers are scarce in the hills, and 
these three tigers had been shot close to where a human being 



had recently been killed and eaten. The cubs had died for the 
sins of their mother. They had undoubtedly eaten the human 
flesh their mother had provided for them from the time they 
were weaned; this, however, did not mean that when they left 
the protection of their mother they would have become man- 
eaters themselves. For in spite of all that has been said 
since Man-eaters of Kumaon was published I still maintain that 
the cubs of man-eating tigers— in that part of India about 
which I am writing— do not become man-eaters simply because 
they have eaten human flesh when young. 

Sitting on the edge of the field with my feet dangling down and 
the rifle resting on my knees, I handed cigarettes to my 
companions and told them I would go and have a look at the 
tiger that had fallen into the rainwater channel, after we had 
finished our smoke. That I would find the tiger dead I had no 
doubt whatsoever; even so, nothing would be lost by waiting a 
few minutes, if for no other reason than to give myself a little 
time to rejoice over the marvellous luck I had met with. Within 
an hour of my arrival at Talla Des I had, quite by accident, got 
in touch with a man-eater that had terrorized an area of many 
hundreds of square miles for eight years, and in a matter of a 
few seconds had shot dead the man-eater and her two cubs. To 
the intense pleasure that all sportsmen feel at having held a 
rifle steady when every drop of blood in one's body is pounding 
with excitement, was added the pleasure and relief of knowing 
that there would be no necessity to follow up a wounded 
animal, a contingency that has to be faced when hunting tigers 
on foot. 

My men would not ascribe my good fortune to luck. To avoid 
the possibility of failure they had consulted the old priest at the 
temple in Naini Tal and he had selected the propitious day for 
us to start on our journey to Talla Des, and evil omens when we 
started had been absent. My success would not be ascribed to 
good luck, therefore; nor, if I had failed to shoot the tigers, 
would my failure have been ascribed to bad luck, for no matter 
how well aimed a bullet might be it could do no harm to an 



animal whose time to die had not come. The superstitions of 
those whom I have been associated with on shikar have always 
been of interest to me. Being myself unwilling to begin a 
journey on a Friday I am not inclined to laugh at a hillman's 
rooted aversion to begin a journey to the north on Tuesday or 
Wednesday to the south on Thursday to the east on Monday or 
Saturday or to the west on Sunday or Friday. To permit those 
who accompany one on a dangerous mission to select the day 
for the start of the journey is a small matter, but it makes all 
the difference between having cheerful and contented 
companions and companions who are oppressed by a feeling of 
impending disaster. 

The four of us sitting on the edge of the field had nearly 
finished our cigarettes, when I noticed that the tiger that was 
resting against the oak sapling was beginning to move. The 
blood from the body had evidently drained into the forward end 
of the animal, making that end heavier than the tail end, and it 
was now slowly slipping down head foremost. Once it was clear 
of the sapling the tiger glissaded down the grassy slope, and 
over the brink of the rock cliff. As it fell through space I threw 
up the rifle and fired. I fired that shot on the spur of the 
moment to give expression to my joy at the success of my 
mission to Talla Des, and also, I am ashamed to admit, to 
demonstrate that there was nothing— not even a tiger falling 
through space— that I could not hit on a day like this. A 
moment after the tiger disappeared among the tree tops, there 
was a rending of branches, followed by a dull and heavy thud. 
Whether or not I had hit the falling tiger did not matter, but 
what did matter was that the men of the village would have 
farther to carry it now than if it had remained on the slope. 

My cigarette finished, I told my companions to sit still while I 
went down to look at the tiger in the rainwater channel. The 
hill was very steep and I had climbed down some fifty feet 
when Dungar Singh called out in a very agitated voice. 'Look, 
Sahib, look. There goes the tiger.' With my thoughts on the 
tiger below me, I sat down and raised my rifle to meet the 



charge I thought was coming. On seeing my preparations, the 
lad called out, 'Not here, but there. Sahib, there. 1 Relieved of 
the necessity of guarding my front I turned my head and looked 
at Dungar Singh and saw he was pointing across the main 
valley to the lower slopes of the hill on which his mother had 
been killed. At first I could see nothing, and then I caught sight 
of a tiger going diagonally up towards a ridge that ran out from 
the main hill. The tiger was very lame and could only take three 
or four steps at a time, and on its right shoulder was a big 
patch of blood. The patch of blood showed it was the tiger that 
had crashed through the trees, for the tiger that had fallen into 
the rainwater channel had been shot in the left shoulder. 

Growing on the hill close to where I was sitting was a slender 
pine sapling. Putting up the three-hundred-yard leaf-sight I got 
a firm grip of the sapling with my left hand and resting the rifle 
on my wrist took a careful and an unhurried shot. The distance 
was close on four hundred yards and the tiger was on a slightly 
higher elevation than I was, so, taking a very full sight, I waited 
until it again came to a stand and then gently pressed the 
trigger. The bullet appeared to take an incredibly long time to 
cover the distance, but at last I saw a little puff of dust and at 
the same moment the tiger lurched forward, and then carried 
on with its slow walk. I had taken a little too full a sight, and 
the bullet had gone a shade too high. I now had the range to a 
nicety and all that I needed to kill the tiger was one more 
cartridge; the cartridge I had foolishly flung away when the 
tiger was falling through the air. With an empty rifle in my 
hands, I watched the tiger slowly and painfully climb to the 
ridge, hesitate for a few moments, and then disappear from 
view. 

Sportsmen who have never shot in the Himalayas will question 
my wisdom in having armed myself with a light -275 rifle, and 
only carrying five rounds of ammunition. My reasons for having 
done so were: 


(a) The rifle was one I had used for over twenty years, and with 



which I was familiar. 


(b) It was light to carry; accurate, and sighted up to three 
hundred yards. 

(c) I had been told by Colonel Barber to avoid using a heavy 
rifle, and not to fire more shots than were necessary with a 
light one. 

With regard to ammunition, I had not set out that morning to 
shoot tigers but to find the village where the last human kill 
had taken place and, if I had the time, to tie out a young buffalo 
as bait. As it turned out, both the light rifle and the five rounds 
would have served my purpose if I had not thrown away that 
vital round. 

My men arrived at the village in time to join the crowd on the 
saddle, and to witness the whole proceedings. They knew that 
the five rounds in the magazine of the rifle were all the 
ammunition I had with me, and when after my fifth shot they 
saw the wounded tiger disappear over the ridge, Madho Singh 
came tearing down the hill with a fresh supply of ammunition. 

The tiger on the patch of green grass, and the tiger in the 
rainwater channel— which I found lying dead where it had 
fallen— were both nearly full-grown, and the one that had got 
away wounded was quite evidently their mother, the man-eater 
of Talla Des. Leaving Madho Singh and Dungar Singh to make 
arrangements for the cubs to be carried up to the village, I set 
out alone to try to get in touch with the wounded tigress. From 
the bed of bracken on to which she had fallen after crashing 
through the trees, I followed a light blood-trail to where she 
had been standing when I fired my last shot. Here I found a few 
cut hairs clipped from her back by my bullet, and a little extra 
blood which had flowed from her wound when she lurched 
forward on hearing my bullet strike the ground above her. 

From this spot to the ridge there was only an occasional drop 
of blood, and on the short stiff grass beyond the ridge I lost the 
trail. Close by was a dense patch of scrub, a hundred yards 



wide, extending up the side of a steep hill for three hundred 
yards, and I suspected that the tigress had taken shelter in this 
scrub. But as night was now closing in and there was not 
sufficient light for accurate shooting, I decided to return to the 
village and leave the searching of the scrub until the following 
day. 

The next morning was spent in skinning the cubs and in 
pegging out their skins with the six-inch nails I had brought 
with me from Naini Tal. While I was performing this task at 
least a hundred vultures alighted on the trees fringing the open 
ground on which my tent was pitched. It was these that 
brought to light the missing clothes of the man-eater's victim, 
for the cubs had torn the blood-soaked garments into strips and 
swallowed them. 

The men of the village sat round me while I was skinning the 
cubs and I told them I wanted them to assist my Garhwalis in 
beating out the patch of scrub in which I thought the wounded 
tigress had taken shelter. This they were very willing to do. At 
about midday we set off, the men going through the village and 
along the saddle to the top of the hill above the cover, while I 
went down the goat track into the valley and up to the ridge 
over which I had followed the tigress the previous evening. At 
the lower edge of the scrub there was an enormous boulder— 
from which I was visible to the men at the top of the hill— I 
waved my hat as a signal for them to start the beat. To avoid 
the risk of anyone getting mauled, I had instructed the men to 
stay on the top of the hill and, after clapping their hands and 
shouting, to roll rocks down the hillside into the scrub I have 
spoken of. One kakar and a few kalege pheasants came out of 
the bushes, but nothing else. When the rocks had searched out 
every foot of the ground, I again waved my hat as a signal for 
the men to stop the beat and return to the village. 

When the men had gone I searched the cover, but without any 
hope of finding the tigress. As I watched her going up the hill 


the previous evening I could see that she was suffering from a 
very painful wound, and when I examined the blood where she 
had lurched forward, I knew the wound was a surface one and 
not internal. Why then had the tigress fallen to my bullet as if 
poleaxed, and why had she hung suspended from the oak 
sapling for a matter of ten to fifteen minutes without showing 
any signs of life? To these questions I could not at the time nor 
can I now find any reasonable answer. Later I found my soft- 
nose, nickel-encased bullet firmly fixed in the ball-and-socket 
joint of the right shoulder. When the flight of a high-velocity 
bullet is arrested by impact with a bone the resulting shock to 
an animal is very considerable. Even so, a tiger is a heavy 
animal with a tremendous amount of vitality, and why a 
light -275 bullet should knock such an animal flat and render it 
unconscious for ten or fifteen minutes is to me inexplicable. 

Returning to the ridge, I stood and surveyed the country. The 
ridge appeared to be many miles long and divided two valleys. 
The valley to the left at the upper end of which was the patch 
of scrub was open grass country, while the valley to the right at 
the upper end of which the tigers had eaten the woman had 
dense tree and scrub jungle on the right-hand side, and a steep 
shaly slope edging in a rock cliff on the left. 

Sitting down on a rock on the ridge to have a quiet smoke, I 
reviewed the events of the previous evening, and came to the 
following conclusions: 

(a) From the time the tigress fell to my shot to the time she 
crashed through the trees, she had been unconscious. 

(b) Her fall, cushioned by the trees and the bed of bracken, had 
restored consciousness but had left her dazed. 

(c) In this dazed condition she had just followed her nose and 
on coming up against the hill she had climbed it without 
knowing where she was going. 

The question that now faced me was: How far and in what 
direction had the tigress gone? Walking downhill with an 



injured leg is far more painful than walking uphill and as soon 
as the tigress recovered from her dazed condition she would 
stop going downhill and would make for cover in which to 
nurse her injury. To get to cover she would have to cross the 
ridge, so the obvious thing was to try to find out if she had 
done so. The task of finding if a soft-footed animal had crossed 
a ridge many miles long would have been a hopeless one if the 
ridge had not had a knife-edge. Running along the top was a 
game track, with an ideal surface for recording the passages of 
all the animals that used it. On the left of the track was a 
grassy slope and on the right a steep shale scree ending in a 
sheer drop into the ravine below. 

Finishing my smoke I set off along the game track on which I 
found the tracks of ghooral, sarao, sambhar, langur, porcupine, 
and the pug-marks of a male leopard. The farther I went the 
more despondent I grew, for I knew that if I did not find the 
tigress's pug-marks on this track there was little hope of my 
ever seeing her again. I had gone about a mile along the ridge, 
disturbing two ghooral who bounded away down the grassy 
slope to the left, when I found the pug-marks of the tigress, and 
a spot of dry blood. Quite evidently, after disappearing from my 
view over the ridge the previous evening, the tigress had gone 
straight down the grassy slope until she recovered from her 
dazed condition and then had kept to the contour of the hill, 
which brought her to the game track. For half a mile I followed 
her pug-marks to where the shale scree narrowed to about 
fifteen yards. Here the tigress attempted to go down the scree, 
evidently with the intention of gaining the shelter of the jungle 
on the far side of the ravine. Whether her injured leg failed her 
or whether dizziness overcame her, I do not know; anyway, 
after falling forward and sliding head-foremost for a few yards 
she turned round and with legs widespread clawed the ground 
in a desperate but vain effort to avoid going over the sheer 
drop into the ravine below. I am as sure-footed as a goat, but 
that scree was far too difficult for me to attempt to negotiate, 
so I carried on along the track for a few hundred yards until I 



came to a rift in the hill. Down this rift I climbed into the 
ravine. 

As I walked up the thirty-yard-wide ravine I noted that the rock 
cliff below the shale scree was from sixty to eighty feet high. 

No animal, I was convinced, could fall that distance on to rocks 
without being killed. On approaching the spot where the 
tigress had fallen I was overjoyed to see the white underside of 
a big animal. My joy, however, was short lived, for I found the 
animal was a sarao and not the tigress. The sarao had evidently 
been lying asleep on a narrow ledge near the top of the cliff 
and, on being awakened by hearing, and possibly scenting, the 
tigress above him, had lost his nerve and jumped down, 
breaking his neck on the rocks at the foot of the cliff. Close to 
where the sarao had fallen there was a small patch of loose 
sand. On this the tigress had landed without doing herself any 
harm beyond tearing open the wound in her shoulder. Ignoring 
the dead sarao, within a yard of which she passed, the tigress 
crossed the ravine, leaving a well-defined blood trail. The bank 
on the right-hand side of the ravine was only a few feet high, 
and several times the tigress tried but failed to climb it. I knew 
now that I would find her in the first bit of cover she could 
reach. But my luck was out. For some time heavy clouds had 
been massing overhead, and before I found where the tigress 
had left the ravine a deluge of rain came on, washing out the 
blood trail. The evening was now well advanced and as I had a 
long and a difficult way to go, I turned and made for camp. 

Luck plays an important part in all sport, and the tigress had— 
so far— had her full share of it. First, instead of lying out in the 
open with her cubs where I would have been able to recognize 
her for what she was, she was lying out of sight in thick cover. 
Then, the flight of my bullet had been arrested by striking the 
one bone that was capable of preventing it from inflicting a 
fatal wound. Later the tigress had twice fallen down a rock 
cliff, where she would undoubtedly have been killed had her 
fall in the one case not been cushioned by branches and a bed 
of bracken and in the other by a soft patch of sand. And finally. 



when I was only a hundred yards from where she was lying up, 
the rain came down and washed out the blood trail. However, I 
too had had a measure of luck, for my fear that the tigress 
would wander away down the greasy slope where I would lose 
touch with her had not been realized, and, further, I knew now 
where to look for her. 

6 

Next morning I returned to the ravine, accompanied by my six 
Garhwalis. Throughout Kumaon the flesh of sarao is considered 
a great delicacy, and as the young animal that had broken its 
neck was in prime condition, it would provide a very welcome 
meat ration for my men. Leaving the men to skin the sarao, I 
went to the spot from where I had turned back the previous 
evening. Here I found that two deep and narrow ravines ran up 
the face of the hill on the right. As it was possible that the 
tigress had gone up one of these, I tried the nearer one first 
only to find, after I had gone up it for a few hundred yards, that 
the sides were too steep for any tiger to climb, and that it 
ended in what in the monsoon rains must have been a thirty- 
foot-high waterfall. Returning to my starting point I called out 
to the men, who were about fifty yards away up the main 
ravine, to light a fire and boil a kettle of water for my tea. I 
then turned to examine the second ravine and as I did so I 
noticed a well-used game track coming down the hill on the 
left-hand side. On the game track I found the pug-marks of the 
tigress, partly obliterated by the rain of the previous evening. 
Close to where I was standing was a big rock. On approaching 
this rock I saw that there was a little depression on the far side. 
The dead leaves in the depression had been flattened down, 
and on them were big clots of blood. After her fall into the 
ravine— which may have been forty hours earlier— the tigress 
had come to this spot and had only moved off on hearing me 
call to the men to boil the kettle for tea. 

Owing to differences in temperament it is not possible to 
predict what a wounded tiger will do when approached by a 
human being on foot, nor is it possible to fix a period during 


which a wounded tiger can be considered as being dangerous— 
that is liable to charge when disturbed. I have seen a tiger with 
an inch-long cut in a hind pad, received while running away, 
charge full out from a distance of a hundred yards five minutes 
after receiving the wound; and I have seen a tiger that had 
been nursing a very painful jaw wound for many hours allow an 
approach to within a few feet without making any attempt to 
attack. Where a wounded man-eating tiger is concerned the 
situation is a little complicated, for, apart from not knowing 
whether the wounded animal will attack on being approached, 
there is the possibility— when the wound is not an internal one 
— of its attacking to provide itself with food. Tigers, except 
when wounded or when man-eaters, are on the whole very 
good-tempered. Were this not so it would not be possible for 
thousands of people to work as they do in tiger-infested 
jungles, nor would it have been possible for people like me to 
have wandered for years through the jungles on foot without 
coming to any harm. Occasionally a tiger will object to too 
close an approach to its cubs or to a kill that it is guarding. The 
objection invariably takes the form of growling, and if this does 
not prove effective it is followed by short rushes accompanied 
by terrifying roars. If these warnings are disregarded, the 
blame for any injury inflicted rests entirely with the intruder. 
The following experience with which I met some years ago is a 
good example of my assertion that tigers are good-tempered. 
My sister Maggie and I were fishing one evening on the Boar 
river three miles from our home at Kaladhungi. I had caught 
two small mahseer and was sitting on a rock smoking when 
Geoff Hopkins, who later became Conservator of Forests, Uttar 
Pradesh, turned up on his elephant. He was expecting friends, 
and being short of meat he had gone out with a -240 rook-rifle 
to try to shoot a kakar or a peafowl. I had caught all the fish we 
needed, so we fell in with Geoff's suggestion that we should 
accompany him and help him to find the game he was looking 
for. Mounting the elephant we crossed the river and I directed 
the mahout to a part of the jungle where kakar and peafowl 
were to be found. We were going through short grass and plum 



jungle when I caught sight of a dead cheetal lying under a tree. 
Stopping the elephant I slipped to the ground and went to see 
what had killed the cheetal. She was an old hind that had been 
dead for twenty-four hours, and as I could find no marks of 
injury on her I concluded that she had died of snakebite. As I 
turned to rejoin the elephant I saw a drop of fresh blood on a 
leaf. The shape of the drop of blood showed that the animal 
from which it had come had been moving away from the 
dead cheetal. Looking a little farther in the direction in which 
the splash from the blood indicated the animal had gone, I saw 
another spot of blood. Puzzled by this fresh blood-trail I set off 
to see where it led to, and signalled to the elephant to follow 
me. After going over short grass for sixty or seventy yards the 
trail led towards a line of thick bushes some five feet high. 
Going up to the bushes where the trail ended I stretched out 
both arms— I had left my rod on the elephant— and parted the 
bushes wide, and there under my outstretched hands was 
a cheetal stag with horns in velvet, and lying facing me and 
eating the stag was a tiger. As I parted the bushes the tiger 
looked up and the expression on its face said, as clearly as any 
words, 'Well, I'll be damned!' Which was exactly what I was 
saying to myself. Fortunately I was so surprised that I remained 
perfectly still— possibly because my heart had stopped beating 
— and after looking straight into my face for a moment the 
tiger, who was close enough to have stretched out a paw and 
stroked my head, rose, turned, and sprang into the bushes 
behind him all in one smooth graceful movement. The tiger had 
killed the stag among the plum bushes shortly before our 
arrival, and in taking it to cover he went past the dead hind, 
leaving the blood trail that I followed. The three on the 
elephant did not see the tiger until he was in the air, when 
the mahout exclaimed with horror, 'Khabardar, Sahib. Sher 
hai.' He was telling me that it was a tiger and to be careful. 

Rejoining my men I drank a cup of tea while they cut up 

the sarao into convenient bits to carry, and returned with them 

to the depression in which I had found the clots of blood. All six 



men had been out on shikarwith me on many occasions, and on 
seeing the quantity of blood they were of the opinion that the 
tigress had a body wound which would prove fatal in a matter 
of hours. On this point we were not in agreement, for I knew 
the wound was a superficial one from which the tigress, given 
time, would recover, and that the longer she lived the more 
difficult it would be to get in touch with her. 

If you can imagine a deep and narrow ravine running up the 
face of a steep hill with the ground on the right sloping towards 
the ravine and well wooded but free of undergrowth, and the 
ground on the left-hand side of the ravine sloping upwards and 
covered with dense patches of ringal (stunted bamboo), 
bracken, and brushwood of all kinds, you will have some idea of 
the country my men and I worked over for the rest of that day. 

My plan was for the men to go up on the right-hand side of the 
ravine, to keep me in sight by climbing into the highest trees 
they could find, and, if they wished to attract my attention, to 
whistle— hillmen, like some boys, are very good at whistling 
through their teeth. They would be in no danger from the 
tigress, for there was no cover on their side, and all of them 
were expert tree-climbers. The tracks of the tigress after she 
left the depression near the big rock showed that she had gone 
up the hill on the left-hand side of the ravine. Up this hill I now 
started to follow her. 

I have emphasized elsewhere that jungle lore is not a science 
that can be learnt from textbooks, but that it can be absorbed a 
little at a time, and that the absorption process can go on 
indefinitely. The same applies to tracking. Tracking, because of 
its infinite variations, is one of the most interesting forms of 
sport I know and it can, at times, be also the most exciting. 
There are two generally accepted methods of tracking. One, 
following a trail on which there is blood, and the other, 
following a trail on which there is no blood. In addition to these 
two methods I have also at times been able to find a wounded 
animal by following blowflies, or by following meat-eating 



birds. Of the two generally accepted methods, following a 
blood-trail is the more sure way of finding a wounded animal. 
But as wounds do not always bleed, wounded animals have at 
times to be tracked by their foot-prints or by the disturbance to 
vegetation caused by their passage. Tracking can be easy or 
difficult according to the nature of the ground, and also 
according to whether the animal being tracked has hard hooves 
or soft pads. When the tigress left the depression— on hearing 
me calling to my men— her wound had stopped bleeding and 
the slight discharge that was coming from the wound owing to 
its having turned septic was not sufficient to enable me to 
follow her, so I had to resort to tracking her by her foot-prints 
and by disturbed vegetation. This, on the ground I was on, 
would not be difficult, but it would be slow, and time was on the 
side of the tigress. For the longer the trail the better the 
chances would be of her recovering from her wound and the 
less chance there would be of my finding her, for the strain of 
the past few days was now beginning to tell on me. 

For the first hundred yards the trail led through knee-high 
bracken. Here tracking was easy, for the tigress had kept to a 
more or less straight line. Beyond the bracken was a dense 
thicket of ringal. I felt sure the tigress would be lying up in this 
thicket, but unless she charged there was little hope of my 
getting a shot at her, for it was not possible to move silently 
through the matted ringals. When I was halfway through the 
thicket akakar started barking. The tigress was on the move, 
but instead of going straight up the hill she had gone out on the 
left, apparently on to open ground, for the kakar was standing 
still and barking. Retracing my steps I worked round to the left 
but found no open ground in that direction, nor did I appear to 
be getting any nearer the barking deer. The kakar, soon after, 
stopped barking and a number of kalege pheasants started 
chattering. The tigress was still on the move, but, turn my head 
as I would, I could not locate the sound. 

Pin-pointing, that is fixing the exact direction and distance of 
all sounds heard, is a jungle accomplishment which I have 



reduced to a fine art and of which I am very proud. Now, for 
the first time, I realized with a shock that my accident had 
deprived me of this accomplishment and that no longer would I 
be able to depend on my ears for safety and for the pleasure of 
listening intimately to the jungle folk whose language it had 
taken me years to learn. Had my remaining ear been sound it 
would not have mattered so much, but unfortunately the drum 
of that ear also had been injured by a gun 'accident 1 many 
years previously. Well, there was nothing that could be done 
about it now, and handicapped though I was I was not going to 
admit at this stage of the proceedings that any tiger, man-eater 
or other, had any advantage over me when we were competing 
for each other's lives under conditions that favoured neither 
side. 

Returning to the bracken, I started to try to find the tigress, 
depending on my eyes only. The jungle appeared to be well 
stocked with game, and I repeatedly heard sambhar, 
kakar, and langur giving their alarm calls, and more than once I 
heard pheasants, jays, and white-capped laughing thrush 
mobbing the tigress. Paying no attention to these sounds, 
which ordinarily I would have listened for eagerly, I tracked the 
tigress foot by foot as, resting frequently, she made her way up 
the hill, at times in a straight line and at times zigzagging from 
cover to cover. Near the top of the hill was a stretch of short 
stiff grass about a hundred yards wide. Beyond this open 
ground were two patches of dense brushwood divided by a 
narrow lane which ran up to the top of the hill. On the short 
stiff grass I lost the tracks. The tigress knew she was being 
closely followed and would therefore expose herself as little as 
possible. The patch of brushwood to my right front was thirty 
yards nearer than the patch to the left, so I decided to try it 
first. When I was within a yard or two of the cover I heard a dry 
stick snap under the weight of some heavy animal. I was 
positive on this occasion that the sound had come from the left, 
so I turned and went to the patch of brushwood from which the 
sound appeared to have come. This was the second mistake I 



made that day— the first was calling to my men to boil the 
kettle for tea— for my men told me later that I crossed the 
open stretch of ground on the heels of the tigress, and that 
when I turned and walked away to the left she was lying on an 
open bit of ground a few yards inside the bushes, evidently 
waiting for me. 

Finding no trace of the tigress in the brushwood on the left I 
came back to the open ground, and, on hearing my men 
whistling, looked in the direction in which I expected them to 
be. They had climbed to the top of a tree a few hundred yards 
to my right, and when I lifted my hand to indicate that I had 
seen them, they waved me up, up, up, and then down, down, 
down. They were letting me know that the tigress had climbed 
to the top of the hill, and that she had gone down on the far 
side. Making what speed I could I went up the narrow lane and 
on reaching the top found an open hillside. On this the grass 
had been burnt recently, and in the ashes, which were still 
damp from the rain of the previous evening, I found the pug- 
marks of the tigress. The hill sloped gently down to a stream, 
the one that I had crossed several miles higher up on the day of 
my arrival at Talla Kote. After lying down and quenching her 
thirst the tigress had crossed the stream and gone up into the 
thick jungle beyond. It was now getting late, so I retraced my 
steps to the top of the hill and beckoned to my men to join me. 

From the big rock where I took up the tracks of the tigress to 
the stream where I left them was only some four miles, and it 
had taken me seven hours to cover the distance. Though it had 
ended in failure the day had been an interesting and exciting 
one. Not only for me who, while doing the tracking, had to 
avoid being ambushed by a wounded man-eating tiger, but also 
for my Garhwalis who by climbing trees had kept both the 
tigress and myself in view most of the time. And it had been a 
long day also, for we had started at daylight, and it was 8 p.m. 
when we got back to camp. 


7 


The following morning while my men were having their food I 
attended to the skins, re-pegging them on fresh ground and 
rubbing wood ashes and powdered alum on the damp parts. 
Tiger skins need a lot of care, for if every particle of fat is not 
removed and the lips, ears, and pads properly treated, the hair 
slips, ruining the skin. A little before midday I was ready to 
start, and accompanied by four of my men— I left the other two 
men in camp to attend to the sarao's skin— I set out for the 
place where I had stopped tracking the tigress the previous 
evening. 

The Valley through which the stream flowed was wide and 
comparatively flat, and ran from west to east. On the left-hand 
side of the valley was the hill on the far side of which I had 
followed the tigress the previous day, and on the right-hand 
side was the hill along which ran the road to Tanakpur. Before 
the advent of the man-eater the valley between these two hills 
had been extensively grazed over by the cattle of Talla Kote, 
and in consequence the ground was criss-crossed by a maze of 
cattle paths, and cut up with narrow eroded water-channels. 
Dotted about the valley were open glades of varying sizes 
surrounded by dense scrub and tree jungle. Good ground on 
which to hunt sambhar, kakar, and bear, all of whose tracks 
were to be seen on the cattle paths, but not the ground one 
would select on which to hunt a man-eating tiger. The hill on 
the left commanded an extensive view of the valley so I spaced 
my men in trees along the crest at intervals of two hundred 
yards to keep a look-out and to be on hand in case they were 
needed. I then went down to the spot where I had left the 
tracks of the tigress the previous evening. 

I had wounded the tigress on 7 April, and it was now the 10th. 
As a general rule a tiger is not considered to be dangerous— 
that is, liable to charge at sight— twenty-four hours after being 
wounded. A lot depends on the nature of the wound, however, 
and on the temper of the wounded individuals. Twenty-four 
hours after receiving a light flesh wound a tiger usually moves 
away on being approached, whereas a tiger with a painful 



body-wound might continue to be dangerous for several days. I 
did not know the nature of the wound the tigress was suffering 
from, and as she had made no attempt to attack me the 
previous day I believed I could now ignore the fact that she was 
wounded and look upon her only as a man-eater, and a very 
hungry man-eater at that, for she had eaten nothing since 
killing the woman whom she had shared with the cubs. 

Where the tigress had crossed the stream there was a channel, 
three feet wide and two feet deep, washed out by rainwater. Up 
this channel, which was bordered by dense brushwood, the 
tigress had gone. Following her tracks I came to a cattle path. 
Here she had left the channel and gone along the path to the 
right. Three hundred yards along was a tree with heavy foliage 
and under this tree the tigress had lain all night. Her wound 
had troubled her and she had tossed about, but on the leaves 
on which she had been lying there was neither blood nor any 
discharge from her wound. From this point on I followed her 
fresh tracks, taking every precaution not to walk into an 
ambush. By evening I had tracked her for several miles along 
cattle paths, water channels, and game tracks, without having 
set eyes on so much as the tip of her tail. At sunset I collected 
my men, and as we returned to camp they told me they had 
been able to follow the movements of the tigress through the 
jungle by the animals and birds that had called at her, but that 
they too had seen nothing of her. 

When hunting unwounded man-eating tigers the greatest 
danger, when walking into the wind, is of an attack from 
behind, and to a lesser extent from either side. When the wind 
is from behind, the danger is from either side. In the same way, 
if the wind is blowing from the right the danger is from the left 
and from behind, and if blowing from the left the danger is 
from the right and from behind. In none of these cases is there 
any appreciable danger of an attack from in front, for in my 
experience all unwounded tigers, whether man-eaters or not, 
are disinclined to make a head-on attack. Under normal 
conditions man-eating tigers limit the range of their attack to 



the distance they can spring, and for this reason they are more 
difficult to cope with than wounded tigers, who invariably 
launch an attack from a little distance, maybe only ten or 
twenty yards, but possibly as much as a hundred yards. This 
means that whereas the former have to be dealt with in a 
matter of split seconds, the latter give one time to raise a rifle 
and align the sights. In either case it means rapid shooting and 
a fervent prayer that an ounce or two of lead will stop a few 
hundred pounds of muscle and bone. 

In the case of the tigress I was hunting, I knew that her wound 
would not admit of her springing and that if I kept out of her 
reach I would be comparatively safe. The possibility that she 
had recovered from her wound in the four days that had 
elapsed since I had last seen her had, however, to be taken into 
account. When therefore I started out alone on the morning of 
11 April to take up the tracks where I had left them the 
previous evening, I resolved to keep clear of any rock, bush, 
tree, or other object behind which the tigress might be lying up 
in wait for me. 

She had been moving the previous evening in the direction of 
the Tanakpur road. I again found where she had spent the 
night, this time on a soft bed of dry grass, and from this point I 
followed her fresh tracks. Avoiding dense cover— possibly 
because she could not move through it silently— she was 
keeping to water channels and game tracks and it became 
apparent that she was not moving about aimlessly but was 
looking for something to kill and eat. Presently, in one of these 
water channels she found and killed a few-weeks-old kakar. She 
had come on the young deer as it was lying asleep in the sun on 
a bed of sand, and had eaten every scrap of it, rejecting 
nothing but the tiny hooves. I was now only a minute or two 
behind her, and knowing that the morsel would have done no 
more than whet her appetite, I redoubled my precautions. In 
places the channels and game tracks to which the tigress was 
keeping twisted and turned and ran through dense cover or 
past rocks. Had my condition been normal I would have 



followed on her footsteps and possibly been able to catch up 
with her, but unfortunately I was far from normal. The swelling 
on my head, face, and neck, had now increased to such 
proportions that I was no longer able to move my head up or 
down or from side to side, and my left eye was closed. 

However, I still had one good eye, fortunately my right one, and 
I could still hear a little. 

During the whole of that day I followed the tigress without 
seeing her and without, I believe, her seeing me. Where she 
had gone along water channels, game tracks, or cattle paths 
that ran through dense cover I skirted round the cover and 
picked up her pug-marks on the far side. Not knowing the 
ground was a very great handicap, for not only did it 
necessitate walking more miles than I need have done, but it 
also prevented my anticipating the movements of the tigress 
and ambushing her. When I finally gave up the chase for the 
day, the tigress was moving up the valley in the direction of the 
village. 

Back in camp I realized that the 'bad time' I had foreseen and 
dreaded was approaching. Electric shocks were stabbing 
through the enormous abscess, and the hammer blows were 
increasing in intensity. Sleepless nights and a diet of tea had 
made a coward of me, and I could not face the prospect of 
sitting on my bed through another long night, racked with pain 
and waiting for something, I knew not what, to happen. I had 
come to Talla Des to try to rid the hill people of the terror that 
menaced them and to tide over my bad time, and all that I had 
accomplished so far was to make their condition worse. 
Deprived of the ability to secure her natural prey, the tigress, 
who in eight years had only killed a hundred and fifty people 
would now, unless she recovered from her wound, look to her 
easiest prey— human beings— to provide her with most of the 
food she needed. There was therefore an account to be settled 
between the tigress and myself, and that night was as suitable 
a time as any to settle it. 



Calling for a cup of tea— made hill-fashion with milk— which 
served me as dinner, I drank it while standing in the moonlight. 
Then, calling my eight men together, I instructed them to wait 
for me in the village until the following evening, and if I did not 
return by then to pack up my things and start early the next 
morning for Naini Tal. Having done this I picked up my rifle 
from where I put it on my bed, and headed clown the valley My 
men, all of whom had been with me for years, said not a word 
either to ask me where I was going or to try to dissuade me 
from going. They just stood silent in a group and watched me 
walk away. Maybe the glint I saw on their cheeks was only 
imagination, or maybe it was only the reflection of the moon. 
Anyway, when I looked back not a man had moved. They were 
just standing in a group as I had left them. 

8 

One of my most pleasant recollections— of the days when I was 
young— are the moonlight walks along forest roads that ten or 
a dozen of us used to take during the winter months, and the 
high teas we consumed on our return home. These walks 
tended to dispel all the fears that assail a human being in a 
forest at night, and, further, they made us familiar with the 
sounds to be heard in a forest by night. Later, years of 
experience added to my confidence and to my knowledge. 

When therefore I left my camp on the night of 11 April— in 
brilliant moonlight— to try conclusions with the Talla Des man- 
eating tigress, I did not set out with any feeling of inferiority on 
what might appear to have been a suicidal quest. 

I have been interested in tigers from as far back as I can 
remember, and having spent most of my life in an area in which 
they were plentiful I have had ample opportunities of observing 
them. My ambition when I was very young was to see a tiger, 
just that, and no more. Later my ambition was to shoot a tiger, 
and this I accomplished on foot with an old army rifle which I 
bought for fifty rupees from a seafaring man, who I am inclined 
to think had stolen it and converted it into a sporting rifle. 

Later still, it was my ambition to photograph a tiger. In the 


course of time all three of these ambitions were fulfilled. It was 
while trying to photograph tigers that I learnt the little I know 
about them. Having been favoured by Government with the 
'freedom of the forests', a favour which I very greatly 
appreciate and which I shared with only one other sportsman 
in India, I was able to move about without let or hindrance in 
those forests in which tigers were most plentiful. Watching 
tigers for days or weeks on end, and on one occasion for four 
and a half months, I was able to learn a little about their habits 
and in particular their method of approaching and of killing 
their victims. A tiger does not run down its prey; it either lies in 
wait or stalks it. In either case contact with its victim is made 
by a single spring, or by a rush of a few yards followed by a 
spring. If therefore an animal avoids passing within striking 
distance of a tiger, avoids being stalked, and reacts instantly to 
danger whether conveyed by sight, scent, or by hearing, it has 
a reasonable chance of living to an old age. Civilization has 
deprived human beings of the keen sense of scent and hearing 
enjoyed by animals, and when a human being is menaced by a 
man-eating tiger he has to depend for his safety almost entirely 
on sight. When restlessness and pain compelled me to be on 
the move that night, I was handicapped to the extent that I only 
had one effective eye. But against this handicap was the 
knowledge that the tigress could do me no harm if I kept out of 
her reach, whereas I could kill her at a distance. My 
instructions therefore to my men to go back to Naini Tal if I 
failed to return by the following evening were not given 
because I thought I could not cope with the tigress, but since I 
feared there was a possibility of my becoming unconscious and 
unable to defend myself. 

One of the advantages of making detailed mental maps of 
ground covered is that finding the way back to any given spot 
presents no difficulty. Picking up the pug-marks of my quarry 
where I had left them, I resumed my tracking, which was now 
only possible on game tracks and on cattle paths, to which the 
tigress was, fortunately, keeping. Sambhar and kakar had now 



come out to the open glades, some to feed and others for 
protection, and though I could not pin-point their alarm calls 
they let me know when the tigress was on the move and gave 
me a rough idea of the direction in which she was moving. 

On a narrow, winding cattle path running through dense cover 
I left the pug-marks of the tigress and worked around through 
scattered brushwood to try to pick them up on the far side. The 
way round was longer than I had anticipated, and I eventually 
came out on an open stretch of ground with short grass and 
dotted about with big oak trees. Here I came to a halt in the 
shadow of a big tree. Presently, by a movement of this shadow, 

I realized that the tree above me was tenanted by a troop 
of langurs. I had covered a lot of ground during the eighteen 
hours I had been on my feet that day and here now was safe 
place for me to rest awhile, for the langurs above would give 
warning of danger. Sitting with my back against the tree and 
facing the cover round which I had skirted, I had been resting 
for half an hour when an old langur gave his alarm call; the 
tigress had come out into the open and the langur had caught 
sight of her. Presently I too, caught sight of the tigress just as 
she started to lie down. 

She was a hundred yards to my right and ten yards from the 
cover, and she lay down broadside on to me with her head 
turned looking up at the calling langur. 

I have had a lot of practice in night shooting, for during the 
winter months I assisted our tenants at Kaladhungi to protect 
their crops against marauding animals such as pig and deer. On 
a clear moonlit night I can usually count on hitting an animal 
up to a range of about a hundred yards. Like most people who 
have taught themselves to shoot, I keep both eyes open when 
shooting. This enables me to keep the target in view with one 
eye, while aligning the sights of the rifle with the other. At any 
other time I would have waited for the tigress to stand up and 
then fired at her, but unfortunately my left eye was now closed 
and a hundred yards was too far to risk a shot with only one 



eye. On the two previous nights the tigress had lain in the one 
spot and had possibly slept most of the night, and she might do 
the same now. If she lay right down on her side— she was now 
lying on her stomach with her head up— and went to sleep I 
could either go back to the cattle path on which I had left her 
pug-marks and follow her tracks to the edge of the cover and 
get to within ten yards of her, or I could creep up to her over 
the open ground until I got close enough to make sure of my 
shot. Anyway, for the present I could do nothing but sit 
perfectly still until the tigress made up her mind what she was 
going to do. 

For a long time, possibly half an hour or a little longer, the 
tigress lay in one position, occasionally moving her head from 
side to side, while the old langur in a sleepy voice continued to 
give his alarm call. Finally she got to her feet and very slowly 
and very painfully started to walk away to my right. Directly in 
the line in which she was going there was an open ravine ten to 
fifteen feet deep and twenty to twenty-five yards wide, which I 
had crossed lower down when coming to the spot where I now 
was. When the tigress had increased the distance between us 
to a hundred and fifty yards, and the chances of her seeing me 
had decreased, I started to follow her. Slipping from tree to 
tree, and moving a little faster than she, I reduced her lead to 
fifty yards by the time she reached the edge of the ravine. She 
was now in range, but was standing in shadow, and her tail end 
was a very small mark to fire at. For a long and anxious minute 
she stood in the one position and then, having made up her 
mind to cross the ravine, very gently went over the edge. 

As the tigress disappeared from view I bent down and ran 
forward on silent feet. Bending my head down and running was 
a very stupid mistake for me to have made, and I had only run a 
few yards when I was overcome by vertigo. Near me were two 
oak saplings, a few feet apart and with inter-laced branches. 
Laying down my rifle I climbed up the saplings to a height of 
ten or twelve feet. Here I found a branch to sit on, another for 
my feet, and yet other small branches for me to rest against. 



Crossing my arms on the branches in front of me, I laid my 
head on them, and at that moment the abscess burst, not into 
my brain as I feared it would, but out through my nose and left 
ear. 

'No greater happiness can man know, than the sudden 
cessation of great pain/ was said by someone who had suffered 
and suffered greatly and who knew the happiness of sudden 
relief. It was round about midnight when relief came to me, and 
the grey light was just beginning to show in the east when I 
raised my head from my crossed arms. Cramp in my legs 
resulting from my having sat on a thin branch for four hours 
had roused me, and for a little while I did not know where I 
was or what had happened to me. Realization was not long in 
coming. The great swelling on my head, face, and neck had 
gone and with it had gone the pain. I could now move my head 
as I liked, my left eye was open, and I could swallow without 
discomfort. I had lost an opportunity of shooting the tigress, 
but what did that matter now, for I was over my bad time and 
no matter where or how far the tigress went I would follow her, 
and sooner or later I would surely get another chance. 

When I last saw the tigress she was heading in the direction of 
the village. Swinging down from the saplings, up which I had 
climbed with such difficulty, I retrieved my rifle and headed in 
the same direction. At the stream I stopped and washed and 
cleaned myself and my clothes as best I could. My men had not 
spent the night in the village as I had instructed them to, but 
had sat round a fire near my tent keeping a kettle of water on 
the boil. As, dripping with water, they saw me coming towards 
them they sprang up with a glad cry of 'Sahib! Sahib! You have 
come back, and you are well . 1 'Yes,' I answered, 'I have come 
back, and I am now well.' When an Indian gives his loyalty, he 
gives it unstintingly and without counting the cost. When we 
arrived at Talla Kote the headman put two rooms at the 
disposal of my men, for it was dangerous to sleep anywhere 
except behind locked doors. On this my bad night, and fully 
alive to the danger, my men had sat out in the open in case they 



could be of any help to me, and to keep a kettle on the boil for 
my tea— if I should return. I cannot remember if I drank the 
tea, but I can remember my shoes being drawn off by willing 
hands, and a rug spread over me as I lay down on my bed. 

Hours and hours of peaceful sleep, and then a dream. Someone 
was urgently calling me, and someone was as urgently saying I 
must not be disturbed. Over and over again the dream was 
repeated with slight variations, but with no less urgency, until 
the words penetrated through the fog of sleep and became a 
reality. 'You must wake him or he will be very angry.' And the 
rejoinder, 'We will not wake him for he is very tired.' Ganga 
Ram was the last speaker, so I called out and told him to bring 
the man to me. In a minute my tent was besieged by an excited 
throng of men and boys all eager to tell me that the man-eater 
had just killed six goats on the far side of the village. While 
pulling on my shoes I looked over the throng and on seeing 
Dungar Singh, the lad who was with me when I shot the cubs, I 
asked him if he knew where the goats had been killed and if he 
could take me to the spot. 'Yes, yes,' he answered eagerly, 'I 
know where they were killed and I can take you there.' Telling 
the headman to keep the crowd back, I armed myself with 
my -275 rifle and, accompanied by Dungar Singh, set off 
through the village. 

My sleep had refreshed me, and as there was now no need for 
me to put my feet down gently— to avoid jarring my head— I 
was able, for the first time in weeks, to walk freely and without 
discomfort. 

The day I arrived at Talla Kote, Dungar Singh, the lad who was 
with me now, had taken me through the village to a narrow 
saddle from where there was an extensive view into two 
valleys. The valley to the right fell steeply away in the direction 
of the Kali river. At the upper end of this valley I had shot the 
cubs and wounded the tigress. The other valley, the one to the 
left, was less steep and from the saddle a goat track ran down 


into it. It was in this valley that the goats had been killed. Down 
the goat track the lad now started to run, with me close on his 
heels. After winding down over steep and broken ground for 
five or six hundred yards, the track crossed a stream and then 
continued down the valley on the left bank. Close to where the 
track crossed the stream there was an open bit of 
comparatively flat ground. Running from left to right across 
this open ground was a low ridge of rock, on the far side of 
which was a little hollow, and lying in the hollow were three 
goats. 

On the way down the hill the lad had told me that round about 
midday a large flock of goats in charge of ten or fifteen boys 
was feeding in the hollow, when a tiger— which they suspected 
was the man-eater— suddenly appeared among them and 
struck down six goats. On seeing the tiger the boys started 
yelling and were joined by some men collecting firewood near 
by. In the general confusion of goats dashing about and human 
beings yelling, the tiger moved off and no one appeared to have 
seen in which direction it went. Grabbing hold of three dead 
goats the men and boys dashed back to the village to give me 
the news, leaving three goats with broken backs in the hollow. 

That the killer of the goats was the wounded man-eater there 
could be no question, for when I last saw her the previous night 
she was going straight towards the village. Further, my men 
told me that an hour or so before my return to camp 
a kakar had barked near the stream, a hundred yards from 
where they were sitting, and thinking that the animal had 
barked on seeing me they had built up the fire. It was fortunate 
that they had done so, for I later found the pug-marks of the 
tigress where she had skirted round the fire and had then gone 
through the village, obviously with the object of securing a 
human victim. Having failed in her quest she had evidently 
taken cover near the village, and at the first opportunity of 
securing food had struck down the goats. This she had done in 
a matter of seconds, while suffering from a wound that made 
her limp badly. 



As I was not familiar with the ground, I asked Dungar Singh in 
which direction he thought the tigress had gone. Pointing down 
the valley he said she had probably gone in that direction, for 
there was heavy jungle farther down. While I was questioning 
him about this jungle, with the idea of going down and looking 
for the tigress, a kalege pheasant started chattering. On 
hearing this the lad turned round and looked up the hill, giving 
me an indication of the direction in which the bird was calling. 
To our left the hill went up steeply, and growing on it were a 
few bushes and stunted trees. I knew the tigress would not 
have attempted to climb this hill, and on seeing me looking at it 
Dungar Singh said the pheasant was not calling on the hill but 
in a ravine round the shoulder of it. As we were not within 
sight of the pheasant, there was only one thing that could have 
alarmed it, and that was the tigress. Telling Dungar Singh to 
leave me and run back to the village as fast as he could go, I 
covered his retreat with my rifle until I considered he was clear 
of the danger zone and then turned round to look for a suitable 
place in which to sit. 

The only trees in this part of the valley were enormous pines 
which, as they had no branches for thirty or forty feet, it would 
be quite impossible to climb. So of necessity I would have to sit 
on the ground. This would be all right during daylight, but if 
the tigress delayed her return until nightfall, and preferred 
human flesh to mutton, I would need a lot of luck to carry me 
through the hour or two of darkness before the moon rose. 

On the low ridge running from left to right on the near side of 
the hollow was a big flat rock. Near it was another and smaller 
one. By sitting on this smaller rock I found I could shelter 
behind the bigger, exposing only my head to the side from 
which I expected the tigress to come. So here I decided to sit. 

In front of me was a hollow some forty yards in width with a 
twenty-foot-high bank on the far side. Above this bank was a 
ten— to twenty-yard— wide flat stretch of ground sloping down 
to the right. Beyond this the hill went up steeply. The three 
goats in the hollow, which were alive when the boys and men 



ran away; were now dead. When striking them down the tigress 
had ripped the skin on the back of one of them. 

The kalege pheasant had now stopped chattering, and I 
speculated as to whether it had called at the tigress as she was 
going up the ravine after the lad and I had arrived or whether 
it had called on seeing the tigress coming back. In the one case 
it would mean a long wait for me, and in the other a short one. 

I had taken up my position at 2 p.m., and half an hour later a 
pair of blue Himalayan magpies came up the valley. These 
beautiful birds, which do a lot of destruction in the nesting 
season among tits and other small birds, have an uncanny 
instinct for finding in a jungle anything that is dead. I heard the 
magpies long before I saw them, for they are very vocal. On 
catching sight of the goats they stopped chattering and very 
cautiously approached. After several false alarms they alighted 
on the goat with the ripped back and started to feed. For some 
time a king vulture had been quartering the sky, and now, on 
seeing the magpies on the goat, he came sailing down and 
landed as lightly as a feather on the dead branch of a pine tree. 
These king vultures with their white shirt-fronts, black coats, 
and red heads and legs, are always the first of the vultures to 
find a kill. Being smaller than other vultures it is essential for 
them to be first at the table, for when the others arrive they 
have to take a back seat. 

I welcomed the vulture's coming, for he would provide me with 
information I lacked. From his perch high up on the pine tree 
he had an extensive view, and if he came down and joined the 
magpies it would mean that the tigress had gone, whereas if he 
remained where he was it would mean that she was lying up 
somewhere close by. For the next half hour the scene remained 
unchanged— the magpies continued to feed, and the vulture 
sat on the dead branch— and then the sun was blotted out by 
heavy rain-clouds. Shortly after, the kalege pheasant started 
chattering again and the magpies flew screaming down the 
valley. The tigress was coming, and here, sooner than I had 
expected, was the chance of shooting her that I had lost the 



previous night when overcome by vertigo. 

A few light bushes on the shoulder of the hill partly obstructed 
my view in the direction of the ravine, and presently through 
these bushes I saw the tigress. She was coming, very slowly 
along the flat bit of ground above the twenty-foot-high bank 
and was looking straight towards me. With only head exposed 
and my soft hat pulled clown to my eyes, I knew she would not 
notice me if I made no movement. So, with the rifle resting on 
the flat rock, I sat perfectly still. When she had come opposite 
to me the tigress sat down, with the bole of a big pine tree 
directly between us. I could see her head on one side of the 
tree and her tail and part of her hindquarters on the other. 

Here she sat for minutes, snapping at the flies that, attracted 
by her wound, were tormenting her. 

10 

Eight years previously, when the tigress was a comparatively 
young animal, she had been seriously injured in an encounter 
with a porcupine. At the time she received this injury she may 
have had cubs, and unable for the time being to secure her 
natural prey to feed herself in order to nourish her cubs, she 
had taken to killing human beings. In doing this she had 
committed no crime against the laws of Nature. She was a 
carnivorous animal, and flesh, whether human or animal, was 
the only food she could assimilate. Under stress of 
circumstances an animal, and a human being also, will eat food 
that under normal conditions they are averse to eating. From 
the fact that during the whole of her man-eating career the 
tigress had only killed a hundred and fifty human beings— 
fewer than twenty a year— I am inclined to think that she only 
resorted to this easily procured form of food when she had cubs 
and when, owing to her injury, she was unable to get the 
requisite amount of natural food needed to support herself and 
her family. 

The people of Talla Des had suffered and suffered grievously 
from the tigress, and for the suffering she had inflicted she was 



now paying in full. To put her out of her misery I several times 
aligned the sights of my rifle on her head, but the light, owing 
to the heavy clouds, was not good enough for me to make sure 
of hitting a comparatively small object at sixty yards. 

Eventually the tigress stood up, took three steps and then stood 
broadside on to me, looking down at the goats. With my elbows 
resting on the flat rock I took careful aim at the spot where I 
thought her heart would be, pressed the trigger, and saw a 
spurt of dust go up on the hill on the far side of her. On seeing 
the dust the thought flashed through my mind that not only had 
I missed the tigress's heart, but that I had missed the whole 
animal. And yet, after my careful aim, that could not be. What 
undoubtedly had happened was that my bullet had gone clean 
through her without meeting any resistance. At my shot the 
tigress sprang forward, raced over the flat ground like a very 
frightened but unwounded animal, and before I could get in 
another shot, disappeared from view. 

Mad with myself for not having killed the tigress when she had 
given me such a good shot, I was determined now that she 
would not escape from me. Jumping down from the rock, I 
sprinted across the hollow, up the twenty-foot bank and along 
the flat ground until I came to the spot where the tigress had 
disappeared. Here I found there was a steep forty-foot drop 
down a loose shale scree. Down this the tigress had gone in 
great bounds. Afraid to do the same for fear of spraining my 
ankles, I sat down on my heels and tobogganed to the bottom. 
At the foot of the scree was a well-used footpath, along which I 
felt sure the tigress had gone, though the surface was too hard 
to show pug-marks. To the right of the path was a boulder- 
strewn stream, the one that Dungar Singh and I had crossed 
farther up, and flanking the stream was a steep grassy hill. To 
the left of the path was a hill with a few pine trees growing on 
it. The path for some distance was straight, and I had run along 
it for fifty or more yards when I heard a ghooral give its alarm 
sneeze. There was only one place where the ghooral could be 
and that was on the grassy hill to my right. Thinking that the 



tigress had possibly crossed the stream and gone up this hill, I 
pulled up to see if I could see her. As I did so, I thought I heard 
men shouting. Turning around, I looked up in the direction of 
the village and saw a crowd of men standing on the saddle of 
the hill. On seeing me look around they shouted again and 
waved me on, straight along the path. In a moment I was on 
the run again, and on turning a corner found fresh blood on the 
path. 

The skin of animals is loose. When an animal that is standing 
still is hit in the body by a bullet and it dashes away at full 
speed, the hole made in the skin does not coincide with the 
hole in the flesh, with the result that, as long as the animal is 
running at speed, little if any blood flows from the wound. 
When, however, the animal slows down and the two holes come 
closer together, blood flows and continues to flow more freely 
the slower the animal goes. When there is any uncertainty as to 
whether an animal that has been fired at has been hit or not, 
the point can be very easily cleared up by going to the exact 
spot where the animal was when fired at, and looking for cut 
hairs. These will indicate that the animal was hit, whereas the 
absence of such hairs will show that it was clean missed. 

After going round the corner the tigress had slowed down, but 
she was still running, as I could see from the blood 
splashes, and in order to catch up with her I put on a spurt. I 
had not gone very far when I came to spur jutting out from the 
hill on my left. Here the path bent back at a very acute angle, 
and not being able to stop myself, and there being nothing for 
me to seize hold of on the hillside, I went over the edge of the 
narrow-path all standing. Ten to fifteen feet below was a small 
rhododendron sapling, and below the sapling a sheer drop into 
a dark and evil-looking ravine where the stream, turning at 
right angles, had cut away the toe of the hill. As I passed the 
sapling with my heels cutting furrows in the soft earth, I 
gripped it under my right arm. The sapling, fortunately, was not 
uprooted, and though it bent it did not break. Easing myself 
round very gently, I started to kick footholds in the soft loamy 



hill-face which had a luxuriant growth of maidenhair fern. 

The opportunity of catching up with the tigress had gone, but I 
now had a well-defined blood-trail to follow, so there was no 
longer any need for me to hurry. The footpath which at first had 
run north now ran west along the north face of a steep and 
well-wooded hill. When I had gone for another two hundred 
yards along the path, I came to flat ground on a shoulder of the 
hill. This was the limit I would have expected a tiger shot 
through the body to have travelled, so I approached the flat 
ground, on which there was a heavy growth of bracken and 
scattered bushes, very cautiously. 

A tiger that has made up its mind to avenge an injury is the 
most terrifying animal to be met with in an Indian jungle. The 
tigress had a very recent injury to avenge and she had 
demonstrated— by striking down six goats and by springing 
and dashing away when I fired at her— that the leg wound she 
had received five days before was no handicap to rapid 
movement. I felt sure, therefore, that as soon as she became 
aware that I was following her and she considered that I was 
within her reach, she would launch an all-out attack on me, 
which I would possibly have to meet with a single bullet. 
Drawing back the bolt of the rifle, I examined the cartridge 
very carefully and satisfied that it was one of a fresh lot I had 
recently got from Manton in Calcutta, I replaced it in the 
chamber, put back the bolt, and threw off the safety catch. 

The path ran through the bracken, which was waist high and 
which met over it. The blood trail led along the path into the 
bracken, and the tigress might be lying up on the path or on 
the right or the left-hand side of it. So I approached the 
bracken foot by foot and looking straight ahead for, on these 
occasions, it is unwise to keep turning the head, when I was 
within three yards of the bracken I saw a movement a yard 
from the path on the right. It was the tigress gathering herself 
together for a spring. Wounded and starving though she was, 
she was game to fight it out. Her spring, however, was never 



launched, for, as she rose, my first bullet raked her from end to 
end, and the second bullet broke her neck. 

Days of pain and strain on an empty stomach left me now 
trembling in every limb, and I had great difficulty in reaching 
the spot where the path bent back at an acute angle and 
where, but for the chance dropping of a rhododendron seed, I 
would have ended my life on the rocks, below. 

The entire population of the village, plus my own men, were 
gathered on the saddle of the hill and on either side of it, and I 
had hardly raised my hat to wave when, shouting at the top of 
their voices, the men and boys came swarming down. My six 
Garhwalis were the first to arrive. Congratulations over, the 
tigress was lashed to a pole and six of the proudest Garhwalis 
in Kumaon carried the Talla Des man-eater in triumph to Talla 
Kote village. Here the tigress was laid down on a bed of straw 
for the women and children to see, while I went back to my 
tent for my first solid meal in many weeks. An hour later with a 
crowd of people around me, I skinned the tigress. 

My first bullet, a -275 soft-nose with split nickel case fired on 7 
April, was bushed and firmly fixed in the ball-and-socket joint 
of the tigress's right shoulder. The second and third bullets, 
fired as she was falling through the air and climbing up the hill, 
had missed her. The fourth, fired on 12 April, had gone clean 
through without striking any bones, and the fifth and sixth had 
killed her. From her right foreleg and shoulder I found some 
twenty porcupine quills, ranging in length from two to six 
inches, which were firmly embedded in muscle and were 
undoubtedly the cause of the tigress's having become a man- 
eater. 

I spent the following day in partly drying the skin, and three 
days later I was safely back in my home with my bad time 
behind me. Baynes very kindly sent for Dungar Singh and his 
brother, and at a public function at Almora thanked them for 
the help they had given me and presented them with my token 
of gratitude. 



A week after my return to Naini Tal, Sir Malcolm Hailey gave 
me an introduction to Colonel Dick, an ear specialist, who 
treated me for three months in his hospital in Lahore and 
restored my hearing sufficiently for me to associate with my 
fellow men without embarrassment, and gave me back the joy 
of hearing music and the song of birds. 



Epilogue 

THE STORY OF THE TALLA DES MAN-EATER— which I 
refrained from telling until I had written Jungle Lore— has now 
been told. I am aware that to many the story will seem 
incredible, and to none more so than to those who have 
themselves hunted tigers. None knows better than I that the 
hunting of tigers on foot is not a popular sport, and that the 
hunting of man-eaters on foot is even less so. I also know that 
the following-up of a wounded tiger on foot is a task that is 
sought by none and dreaded by all. And yet, knowing these 
things, I have told of the hunting of a man-eating tiger on foot, 
not only by day but also by night, and the chasing on foot of a 
wounded tiger. Small wonder, then, if my story to many should 
seem incredible. 

There are few places in Kumaon where a fortnight's holiday 
could be more pleasantly spent than along the eastern border 
of the Almora district. Hiking in the Himalayas is becoming a 
very popular pastime, and I could suggest no more pleasant 
hike for a sportsman or for a party of young army men or 
students than the following: 

Start from Tanakpur, but before doing so get the peshkar to 
give you a tahsil peon to show you where the epic fight took 
place between the elephant and the two tigers. From Tanakpur 
go via Baramdeo to Purnagiri. Here, after doing darshan at the 
temple, learn all you can from the High Priest and the 
temple pujaris about the lights that appear on the far side of 
the Sarda, and similar manifestations, as for example the fire 
with an old man sitting near it telling his beads that is to be 
seen during certain seasons at the foot of the Pindari glacier. 
From Purnagiri a track used by the priests will take you to 
Thak village. This is beautifully situated, and while you rest and 
admire the view, get the headman or any of the other men 
sitting round to give you his version of the shooting of the Thak 
and of the Chuka man-eating tigers. Tewari, a relative of the 
headman and as fine a type of a hill Brahmin as you will see. 



wall then show you where his brother whose body he helped 
me find was killed, the mango tree with a spring at its roots, 
and the rock on the way down to Chuka where I shot the Thak 
man-eater. He will also, if you have the time, show you 
the ficus tree from which I shot the Chuka man-eater. At Chuka 
inguire for Kunwar Singh, and hear his story of the hunting of 
the two tigers. 

From Chuka to Talla Kote is a long march, and it will be 
advisable to start at the crack of dawn. Having forded the 
Ladhya near its junction with the Sarda, you will come to Sem. 
The headman of Sem, who was a boy when I knew him, will 
show you where the man-eater killed his mother while she was 
cutting grass near their home. With Sem behind you and a stiff 
climb accomplished, you will pass the small hamlet where I 
spent a night under a mango tree. After going over the ridge 
you will come to a forest road. Take the turn to the left and 
follow the road until you come to a stream. Cross the stream 
and the small patch of open ground on which my 40-lb tent was 
pitched, and you have reached you destination, Talla Kote. 

Dungar Singh, malguzar (land-holder) of Talla Kote, will now be 
about forty years of age. Give him my salams and ask him to 
take you to the ling or saddle from which there is an extensive 
view into two valleys. Face first the valley to the east and get 
Dungar Singh to point out the bush where his mother was 
killed, the oak tree under which she was eaten, the wyran field 
on which the young tigers were shot, and the grassy hill up 
which the wounded tigress went. Then turn round, walk a few 
steps, and face the valley to the west. Dungar Singh will now 
point out where the six goats were killed, where the tigress 
was standing when my bullet went through her, and the 
footpath along which she dashed and along which I ran after 
her. 

The hunting of no other tiger has ever been witnessed by a 
greater number of non-participants than witnessed the hunting 
of the Talla Des man-eating tiger. Some of those will have 



passed away, but many will still remain and they will not have 
forgotten my visit or the thrilling events of the week I spent 
with them.